---
subject: "AI #42: The Wrong Answer"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-12-14 14:48:12
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
With the year ending and It was also another eventful week. We got a lot more clarity on the OpenAI situation, although no key new developments on the ground. The EU AI Act negotiators reached a compromise, which I have not yet had the opportunity to analyze properly. We got a bunch of new toys to play with, including NotebookLM and Grok, and the Gemini API. I made a deliberate decision not to tackle the EU AI Act here. Coverage has been terrible at telling us what is in the bill. I want to wait until we can know what is in it, whether or not that means Table of Contents
This week also includes Also this week but not about AI, Introduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. The search for the good life continues. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. What we have is a failure to grok. GPT-4 Real This Time. Lazy on winter break, looking around for… newspapers? The Other Gemini. API it out, and nothing is ever a coincidence. Fun With Image Generation. Don’t train on me. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. AI robocalls, boyfriends, honest deepfakes. They Took Our Jobs. Journalists and teachers. Where are you providing value? Get Involved. Fellowships, an invitation to talk, an excellent potential hire. Introducing. Claude for Sheets. In Other AI News. Union deals, ByteDance claims, robots trained zero shot. Quiet Speculations. Predictions are hard, perhaps you need a cult. The Quest for Sane Regulation. Continued claims of imminent disaster. The EU AI Act. A deliberate decision not to speculate until I know more. The Week in Audio. Shane Legg. Rhetorical Innovation. Bengio at the Senate, worries about false hope. Doom! Broader context of doom debates, misconceptions, false precision. Doom Discourse Innovation. Breaking it down to move things forward. E/acc. Roon offers some clarity. I hope to mostly be done with this topic (ha!). Poll says e/ack. E/acc deeply unpopular, liability for AI very popular. Turing Test. Did we pass it? Did we not care, and what does that tell us? Aligning a Human Level Intelligence Also Difficult. Jailbreaks, benchmarks. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Adversarial testing. Open Foundation Model Weights Are Unsafe And Nothing Can Fix This. Let us carefully define our terms. A look at a new report on the question from Stanford. Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Don’t despair. The Wit and Wisdom of Sam Altman. Actually very good wisdom this week. The Lighter Side. Stuck in the middle with you.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
Elon Musk wants to make a language model that speaks truth.
There is truth here. Also wisdom. Also the lack thereof. There are places where going along with a wife who says that which is not is the 100% correct play. This often will importantly not be one of them. The excellent goal of happy wife is not so easy as to be reached purely by agreement.
This is my experience as well. The LLM helps me code, so I am far more tempted to code. It makes art, so my work has more art in it now. It can tell me what I want to know, so I ask more questions and do more to learn. And so on. See the section below on teachers and education. You can use LLMs to be lazy, but that is a choice. Make the other one.
Three key questions here: Why is Claude going backwards from 1 to 2 to 2.1? Is the gap between GPT-4 versions really this large? Why is the GPT-3.5-Turbo line so hard to cross?
Is Claude actually getting worse? That hasn’t matched my experience, but the only change I really noticed was the bigger context window. It is a huge gap up top for the top two variants. They’re saying GPT-4-Turbo is a bigger improvement over GPT-4-0613, than that version was over GPT-3.5-Turbo. The other phenomenon is the continued failure of anyone to break through the GPT-3.5-Turbo barrier. Many models get very close to 3.5, only Anthropic and OpenAI have managed to do even a little better. This concentration of results seems underexplored. Is there a kind of ‘natural’ set of LLM abilities that is relatively easy to get to, after which you need to work a lot harder? Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane UtilityFail to
Skill issue.
Getting things right on the first try is difficult. Now that you see this, yes, obviously you should filter out of your data any snippets with ‘as a large language model’ or ‘OpenAI’s use case policy’ so this does not happen. But that’s easy to say now. There are a lot of things like this, and any team is going to get some of them wrong.
GPT-4 Real This Time
Cool idea. As I understand it, the idea is that you can fine tune on authoritative content as it comes out, so GPT-4 will know about at least some recent events, making it a lot more helpful. It provides sources, which will provide traffic in return. It makes sense that we can have confidence that trusted sources can be continuously incorporated quickly. My worry is that a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing. If we know there is a knowledge cutoff from six months ago, and I ask a question, I have excellent context for what to do with the answer. If I have that, plus Politico and Business Insider for the past six months, then I’m in a strange limbo where the AI has a very narrow and potentially more biased and confused perspective on recent events, and I don’t know how much that is incorporated or influencing replies. This is one of those ‘play with the model for 15 minutes’ situations, until then we won’t know. Could be nothing. My other worry is that recent events will get a strong bias in favor of mainstream media and its narrative, without ‘untrusted’ sources to counterbalance. Imagine a person who reads only Politico and BI (and a few others like NYT/WSJ/WaPo), but has zero exposure to the real world in the last six months. We will need to find ways to classify other sources as trusted.
ChatGPT+ subscription signups are back online. The Other Gemini
Input: $0.00025 / 1k characters, $0.0025 / image. Output: $0.0005 / 1k characters Since Gemini Pro is presumably a roughly 3.5-level model,
Estimate of Gemini Ultra at 9.0 x 10^25 flops, right below the executive order’s reporting threshold.
I think aspects of all four are present. OpenAI clearly has important secret sauce, given how difficult it has been for others to match even GPT-3.5. The fact that the secret sauce has kept OpenAI in the lead, and so many models have come in so close to GPT-3.5, together with the Gemini results and OpenAI’s inability so far to substantially improve on GPT-4, despite massive willingness to invest, all point towards progress potentially becoming more difficult under the current paradigm. I assume Gemini was Google’s best that it could do on December 6th, 2023. I also assume Gemini Ultra’s goal was to out-benchmark GPT-4. As in, Google’s goal was, as quickly as possible or by some deadline, to match or exceed GPT-4. They used scaling laws to predict exactly when and how they could get Gemini Ultra to do that. Once that happened, they fine-tuned, tested and presented, and also deployed Gemini Pro. Gemini Ultra they might be continuing to train past the version they benchmarked, or they might have done that run to get here and then started on a newer better version from scratch, perhaps with help from the newly available Gemini Ultra 1.0, or some combination thereof. We do not know. What I do not believe is that any of this is a coincidence. I believe Google aimed to get the results they showed as quickly as possible. This was as quickly as possible. Now they will get back to work to do better. Another fun fact is that Gemini was estimated (with wide error bars, to be clear) to have used 9.0 x 10^25 flops, versus the executive order reporting threshold of 10^26 flops. Again, what a coincidence. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
This was always coming. Ashley identifies itself as an AI and who it works for up front, so it seems essentially fine to me. You can hang up on an AI without worrying you are being rude, or you can have the conversation if you find that helpful.
They Took Our Jobs
The first is wrong because anyone losing their job to technological change deserves our sympathy not mockery, remember that it is coming for your job too at some point, and also because most journalists are not doing the thing that this replaces. Channel 1 will be employing journalists for a while. The second is wrong because it is, and only works, exactly two steps ahead. First the wordsmiths lose their jobs. Learn to code. Then the AI can code better than you. Learn a physical skill. Then the AI can do physical skills better than you. What now?
I would not presume a large gap in time between step two and step three. More likely the opposite. If coders are out of a job, AI capabilities will advance super rapidly, now that it is doing all the coding. Set aside the question of whether we then all rapidly get disempowered or die, given we are no longer doing the tasks that matter. Assume life goes on. If the point is ‘you will be out of work entirely so get a hobby’ then again I ask why a species with nothing productive to do is confident it will be sticking around sufficiently in charge to have hobbies, but if we do there will be plenty of time later to learn to do whatever strikes your fancy.
Of the tools students are using to have their essays written:
I have not heard of Wordtune or Fermat, but I do know Elicit. They applied for funding from SFF. I have talked to the founders. I have used the product. It hasn’t made it into my typical workflow, but it is a genuine and useful tool for searching for relevant papers and extracting key information. It is exactly the kind of tool you want in the hands of a student. If you think that’s cheating, what game are you playing? They mention AI tools for critiquing writing. What is clear? What errors have you made? I see that kind of tool as purely good for learning. Again, if you think that kind of help is bad for the student, what is even going on? They also mention Lex. I tried Lex, which is essentially Google Docs where you can type +++ and it will do a completion, which its user sees as a last resort. I saw it as a fun little game to try out, but if you can get Lex to write your essay for you, and it turns out well, I am confident you did most of the important work.
That’s… good, right? That’s why I have it in my AI Tools browser tab group? What is the skill that you aren’t developing if you use that? If anything this is a reminder that I should use it more often. The article does realize that AI is doing a lot of good work. And that teachers now must figure out, when they ask for an assignment, what is the point of that assignment? What is it trying to do? The key question to ask, always:
Exactly. The assignment’s purpose is for you to learn. If you use AI such that you do not learn while doing the assignment, that’s bad, and that is cheating of a sort, if only of yourself. The teacher’s job is to find assignments that do not make it tempting to so cheat. Ultimately, it seems like it comes down to the motivation of the student. If the student is there to pass the class and get the degree, you are screwed. You were already screwed, but now you are screwed even more. If the student is there to learn, the sky is the limit. Their learning got supercharged. So this is a place where we should see radically increased inequality. Students that ask the question ‘how do I use these tools to help me learn’ study and grow strong. Students that instead ask ‘how do I get an A on this assignment’ get left behind. We can ask, how do we design assignments in the age of AI to mitigate cheating. Or how do we catch cheating. Those are good questions, but not the right question. The right question is: How do we motivate the student to want to learn? Get InvolvedI realized I’ve perhaps never said it outright, so: If you are an interested Congressional staffer, member of a NatSec agency or otherwise well-positioned within in the government (or working at OAI/ANT/DM/etc) and trying to learn about or help with AI, AI policy and existential risk, this is an open invitation that I would happily do a video call, or meet in person in New York City, or exchange emails, to help out as appropriate. If there is sufficiently strong justification I can get on the Acela and visit Washington. Please do reach out to me, you can use email, LessWrong PMs or Twitter DMs. Happy to answer questions, and of course there are no stupid questions. (Others are also welcome to reach out to me as well, and I will do what I can, although time might not permit me to respond to everyone or respond as fully as I’d like.)
Not AI or world saving or anything, but Not AI but potentially somewhat world saving is Introducing
Then you can use =CLAUDE(prompt) which automatically wraps it in human and assistant for you, or =CLAUDEFREE(prompt) which forces you to do that manually. So now you have a choice of LLMs for your Google Sheet. Still waiting on Gemini.
In Other AI News
…in accordance with the story ‘don’t train humanoid transformers with large-scale reinforcement learning in simulation and deploy them to the real word zero-shot. There’s a 30 second video at the link. It isn’t actually scary as such, given that all they show is walking along smooth flat surfaces.
Stock market counting on AI companies to start showing profits,
Quiet SpeculationsPaul Graham gives what is in general very good practical advice.
What this advice assumes is that you can hope to improve your own outcome, but the overall outcome while unpredictable is not something you can influence - which certainly isn’t true for Paul Graham. This is a common reaction to the world being hard to influence. If everyone acted on it, in many arenas events would go poorly. AI is only the latest example. What is different in the AI example is that, while what will happen is very hard to predict, the most important aspects of the endpoint if AI continues to gain capabilities and no one successfully steers the outcome away from its default pathways are easier to predict: A future controlled by artificial intelligence, that does not contain humans, or likely anything that (most) humans value. Roon
Makes sense. We need more energy like this, including trying out bold stances for a few days without being tied to them. The random patterns thing is (as I see it) a stand-in for ‘spend and arrange the matter and energy in some way we do not care about.’ Where anything without sufficient complexity is clearly not something we care about. Part of the idea is that if an AI is maximizing a specific instruction or defined function, or following an algorithm far outside of distribution, to find the best configuration of matter, the chance that the maxima (or trapped local maxima) has that much complexity seems low, and if it does have complexity the chance that complexity is valuable still seems low. With sufficiently complexity, it becomes less clear, but in general I expect most complex arrangements of atoms chosen by humans to have positive value to me, but for most arrangements of atoms chosen by a very different process to probably not have value, and believe they have expected value of almost zero to me.
Saudi Aramco ($2.1 trillion, 3rd largest in the world by market cap) is the counterexample, since the rest are tech companies. Even one clear counterexample seems meaningful since there are only six such companies in existence. I’d actually also guess that Jeff Bezos of Amazon, while a fan of technological progress, did not (and does not) have a cult-level belief in it. And my guess that Mark Zuckerberg of Meta also doesn’t think about things that way, he simply believes in building user services. And does Bill Gates of Microsoft (among other of their later CEOs) strike anyone as having a cultlike devotion to technological progress, or is he more of a savvy businessman? I do think Google and Apple count in terms of their founders. But I wouldn’t describe Tim Cook this way at all based on what I know.
I think the confusions would continue without any deliberate misrepresentation. People hallucinate what they think others must mean and be saying all the time. Eliezer’s position feels weird enough people will constantly try to ‘autocorrect’ it into something related they can better grok, and such confusions spread. I mean, yes, also the enemy action, that too. I do think that the hooking up of AGIs to decisions made by AWSs is a rather bad sign for our predicted future decision making, and how likely we are to give up our power to AIs of various sorts, and the norms we will establish around such matters. There are also certainly some scenarios where marginal affordances like this can turn out to matter quite a lot, although they are far from Yudkowsky’s central expectation. The thing about a Terminator is that what worries you should not be the Terminator. It is that there exists an entity that was capable of designing and building a Terminator, and that chose to do that. Also, if we’re taking this too seriously, I’d be worried about the time travel. The AI figured out backwards time travel. The actual killer robot part does not much matter. If you’re smart enough to crack time travel, and also you have time travel, I’m pretty sure you have plenty of routes to victory. All joking aside, yes, if you have a sufficiently capable superintelligence, then it does not matter much whether we hand it the weapons. The weapons are neither necessary nor sufficient. If it needs physical weapons (which it probably doesn’t) it will get some physical weapons. The Quest for Sane Regulations
The Overton Window is currently very wide. A lot could happen. However Congress usually does nothing about anything, that’s the default. It takes a lot to make anything get through. If you do the 90% of life of showing up, many will indeed talk to you. If you do show up, have business cards, draft legislation and written summaries. Inside game was seen as overestimated in its relative importance. Then again, if that was not true, would that become clear from a trip like this? Existing DC safety people are largely dismissive and discouraging of new entrants, protective of their positions, rather than trying to educate, help or coordinate. While botched action can be actively harmful, we do not seem (to me based on what I would be able to share) to be in a position to play this protectively, but again if there was better inside game, would we know? (Not mostly from this source on this point, but needs to be said): Identifying or being associated with Effective Altruism is increasingly a problem in the advocacy and policy spaces, over and above my other many disagreements with EA. The reputation is quite bad such that EA funding sources are treated as red flags. Also the movement sacrifices a lot in the name of reputation, reputational risk and movement influence, and often preferences inside game. This is especially true if, as noted above, new entrants are mostly not getting help or coordination. If things are to turn out well, we need funders who are outside of EA circles, who can step up and support good efforts while filtering out bad ones. I know of multiple people trying to move this forward behind the scenes.
Technically she is right, in the sense that one ‘could sue’ over almost anything. The law works that way. But win? I think her best point was actually at the very end of the article. Hawley is thinking of Section 230 as a shield that you can use to censor. It is sometimes that, but Section 230 is also, and more importantly, a shield you use in order to not censor.
One must be careful. I believe that
Rather, it is (already) possible to sue the app, and without section 230 such a suit would be harder to quickly dismiss, and in theory you would be in marginally more danger of losing it. But it would be very surprising to me if VoiceMod was actually liable here, barring some additional reason for that to be true in this case.
As I understand it, to the extent such legal uncertainty would exist without 230, such apps are already in legal uncertainty, because we do not know if 230 would apply in such cases (and not in a 99% kind of way, there is real argument about how this would go). My prediction is that this rule on Section 230 will in practice do almost 100% nothing. I believe the definition of Generative AI would not be, in practice, extended to absurd cases. Nor do I think, even if 230 immunity was lost in such cases, that liability would in practice be found without good reason. But to the extent that it does do something, I believe Hawley is wrong that it would lead to less rather than more censorship, and in particular politically motivated censorship, to introduce greater liability. The EU AI Act
What does it actually say? Ah, that is always the tricky part. I don’t know! I wrote a section here about various claims in secondary sources, about whether it exempts open source models from regulations and whether it will restrict math or define AI to include taking the mean on Excel or cripple every small business. But on reflection I think it is better to be patient. Nothing is going into effect for several years. By the time it does, a lot will have changed. So I want to get it right, figure out what it actually says, and only then report back. The Week in Audio
Rhetorical Innovation
Consider reading the whole thing. Of all the similar statements I have seen, I believe this is the best one so far.
At that meeting,
What a world. I like p(hope) to distinguish p(no AGI, so no doom but not hope) from p(AGI and good outcome). The dodge of ‘it’s not a probability it’s a decision problem’ Russel offered is not how probability works, but I get it. Russel also noted that those with a financial interest in AI said p(doom)=0.
I continue to not understand how anyone can say zero (or even epsilon) with a straight face.
An older thread in which Beff Jezos says that laws of the universe and Thermodynamics
I do think a lot of this is going on. People actually cannot imagine the idea that those who disagree with them could be anything other than grifting, because they inhabit a world where money is the score and the only question is are you building or grifting or some strange mix of both.
In response to the argument by some that AI is not dangerous because we will not give it a ‘drive to dominate’:
|