---
subject: "A Conversation with JCal about the Evolution of Media"
from: "Chamath Palihapitiya <chamath@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-04-18 23:03:16
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Chamath", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_4017391144830520384", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
After the team and I published our Chamath: You’ve often spoken fondly to me about the ‘Golden Age’ of journalism. What was that period like? Jason: I came into the media business as an outsider during the end of the Golden Age of journalism, which was during the 90s. This was a period of time where a journalist could make $1-$5 per word to write an article. I remember writing a piece for So if you consider just the economics of words at that time – my loft in Manhattan was $1,800/month. So I could write a 1,000-word piece and pay my rent with that. Just think about the luxury of that moment of time in New York. And if I were to work as a Publishers were going to writers and saying, “Do a profile of this artist, musician, actor, director, business person… Here's $20,000.” The economics of those businesses still worked then. Chamath: Obviously, with the internet driving the cost of distribution to zero, words have become more of a commodity, even more so with the emergence of GPTs. Maybe the average cost per word today is much less than 1¢? But I don’t think this applies to top writers. It’s just that the bottom has fallen out with your average writer. Jason: Exactly. Back then, if you hit the top peak of success, you were rich enough to have a summer home. Like you said, that’s still the case if you’re a top writer today. The key difference is that back then, the frontline of writers – the soldiers – they made a solid living. There were lots of jobs at a newspaper that paid $60,000-$80,000/year. Even if you worked for a trade publication, you could make $50,000/year and you could live in Brooklyn in a $1,000/month apartment, no problem. Chamath: So how did the bottom start to fall out with what we now call ‘traditional media’ or ‘mainstream media’? Jason: During the Golden Age of journalism, you had all these newspapers and magazines that were just getting fatter and fatter over time. We used to have classifieds in print newspapers and that classifieds business might represent ~30% of revenue of And then you had these But at the turn of the century, people’s habits changed, and these pillars of revenue went away slowly… and then all at once, as they say about bankruptcy. Why did people stop buying print newspapers and print magazines? Because they had the internet at home, and later an iPod or smartphone in their pocket. So these businesses just lost two huge revenue streams. Classifieds were gone. Print advertising was gone. And then so went the newsstand’s revenue... Subscribe to Chamath Palihapitiya to unlock the rest.Become a paying subscriber of Chamath Palihapitiya to get access to this post and other subscriber-only content. A subscription gets you:
|