---
subject: "AI #88: Thanks for the Memos"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-31 14:51:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
Following up on We also have word of a new draft AI regulatory bill out of Texas, along with similar bills moving forward in several other states. It’s a bad bill, sir. It focuses on use cases, taking an EU-style approach to imposing requirements on those doing ‘high-risk’ things, and would likely do major damage to the upsides of AI while if anything making the important downsides worse. If we want to redirect our regulatory fate away from this dark path in the wake of the veto of SB 1047, we need to act soon. There were also various other stories, many of which involved OpenAI as they often do. There was a report of a model called ‘Orion’ in December but Altman denies it. They’re helping transcribe lots of medical records, and experiencing technical difficulties. They disbanded their AGI readiness team. They’re expanding advance voice mode. And so on. And as always, there’s plenty more. Table of Contents[Language Models Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/778491ff-375e-45e2-9797-d5444f3a7fcf?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Get your own agent running.[Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility.](https://substack.com/redirect/bff3ae15-62a1-4b43-8bf6-dfa991075004?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Again, not if you don’t use them.[In Summary.](https://substack.com/redirect/c1a1f7c0-f5ed-4405-ba43-7faee01b5c04?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Why read the whole thing when you can read the summary?[Master of Orion.](https://substack.com/redirect/641b80a3-452c-4eb3-a21d-3398c32f7517?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Altman dismisses December OpenAI model release as fake news.[Whispers in the Night.](https://substack.com/redirect/321f875e-fc18-45fd-8e09-2fcd83866640?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI transcription of medical records, with hallucinations.[Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon.](https://substack.com/redirect/dccb0f0c-ed5b-4ff4-b0f3-be91e6d168cb?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)No, you hang up. No, you hang up.[Overcoming Bias.](https://substack.com/redirect/d910ab1c-2ce7-4ccb-beca-39a81c26dd07?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Feature steering mostly preserves accuracy, up to a point.[They Took Our Jobs.](https://substack.com/redirect/b4f7b1b8-4d14-4848-8a08-e70a98dd48f3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Which jobs will they be allowed to take?[The Art of the Jailbreak.](https://substack.com/redirect/20372fb5-aab6-43d6-a109-2feb7a362eac?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Don’t jailbreak, just steer us through mythic space.[Get Involved.](https://substack.com/redirect/e25eeb61-dc95-4470-8968-ea0c1ec51cc6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Apollo Research position on the EU AI Act.[Introducing.](https://substack.com/redirect/1f57502d-e446-431b-bbfe-2c54c172c14b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Perplexity features, Sonnet in GitHub Copilot, prompting essentials.[In Other AI News.](https://substack.com/redirect/1aefc672-b2aa-492c-baaa-fde39f086138?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We have the chips, also the voice modes.[Quiet Speculations.](https://substack.com/redirect/02b40d42-47b7-4cd5-add1-b21ca19c242e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)AI is going to be a huge deal.[Thanks for the Memos: Introduction and Competitiveness.](https://substack.com/redirect/2c9787ad-de4b-4972-a1b0-0de533d62680?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)White House memo.[Thanks for the Memos: Safety.](https://substack.com/redirect/948ce27a-e04c-4b26-aaac-b62747b3c565?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)It’s not where we’d like, but it’s there at all.[Thanks for the Memos: National Security and Government Adaptation.](https://substack.com/redirect/6d3a9ccb-5570-40b4-be86-7df118b96e11?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)More.[Thanks for the Memos: International Governance.](https://substack.com/redirect/b154b462-7a41-4806-84a8-0f6bc1dc7416?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Democratic values.[EU AI Act in Practice.](https://substack.com/redirect/69dceccd-e6e3-4222-8e31-ffa5911da598?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The regulatory burdens, in all the wrong places.[Texas Messes With You.](https://substack.com/redirect/e2091f6a-f828-48c2-8dbb-3a6f49865c92?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)EU style AI regulation might be coming to Texas? Oh no.[The Quest for Sane Regulations.](https://substack.com/redirect/737816ab-5063-43cb-ae7f-9c43382ebbe1?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Thomas Friedman is more AGI pilled than I am?[The Week in Audio.](https://substack.com/redirect/86696332-3593-4338-bb64-464e21119d2b?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)We need to stop hiring those $2,000/hr paralegals.[Rhetorical Innovation.](https://substack.com/redirect/b5173309-e866-4a56-bc80-63906416de4e?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)What matters is what they hear, and what they then do.[Roon Speaks.](https://substack.com/redirect/eb020e8d-aa98-47cc-a93c-8378c32f188f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)And that’s just him being humble and reasonable.[The Mask Comes Off.](https://substack.com/redirect/105661d8-c931-497f-87e8-3416d08ef00f?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)OpenAI disbands its AGI readiness team.[I Was Tricked Into Talking About Shorting the Market Again.](https://substack.com/redirect/ef3209b8-a687-42f6-bdbd-928bf96816d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)Ya got me.[The Lighter Side.](https://substack.com/redirect/7177d4d5-c8b0-4398-97dc-562de2af58d3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)The more you know.
Language Models Offer Mundane UtilityWant your own Claude AI agent?
That’s it. Congratulations, and have fun. I’m sure nothing will go wrong. Am I tempted? Definitely. But I think I’ll wait a bit, ya know?
Washington Post illustrates how far behind the rest of the world is with
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
The one true eval, for me, has always been Magic: the Gathering, ideally on a set and format that’s completely outside the training data.
At what level of security will we be comfortable letting the public use such agents? Right now, without mitigations, the prompt injections seem to basically always work. As Simon asks, if you cut that by 90%, or 99%, is that enough? Would you be okay with sometimes going to websites that have a 1% chance of hijacking your computer each time? The question answers itself, and that is before attackers improve their tactics. We don’t need reliability on the level of an airplane, but we need pretty good reliability. My suspicion is that we’re going to have to bite the bullet on safeguards that meaningfully amplify token usage, if we want to get where we need to go.
I tentatively think Critch is correct, but I don’t feel great about it.
My experience with coding in general, both with and without AI, is that it is indeed highly bimodal. You either get something right or know how to do something, or else you don’t. Over time, hopefully, you expand what you do know how to do, and you get better at choosing to do things in a way that works. But you spend most of your time being driven crazy by the stuff that doesn’t work, and ‘AI spits out a bunch of non-working code you don’t understand yet’ means the bimodality is even more extreme, the AI can catch many bugs, but when it can’t, oh boy.
Similarly, if you’re still talking about stochastic parrots,
Note that 0.5% of work hours involving AI would translate to 0.125% increase in productivity, implying that those that do use AI enjoy 25% productivity growth. I flat out don’t buy that AI adaptation could be an order of magnitude slower than PC adaptation was, while enhancing productivity 25%. That doesn’t make sense to me. The pace is still way lower than I would expect given the quality of the technology. This says something important about America and how people adapt new technologies. Teachers are reporting their whole classes are constantly using ChatGPT, to do their fake work, whereas at corporations people’s fake work isn’t important enough to use AI to do it until someone forces them to. Curious.
In Summary
There’s a wonderful scene in A Beautiful Mind where Thus, AI. Maeve can’t simply say “Expressing affection and admiration,” that won’t work, but once she’s written the texts Anna can read the summary and then get the benefits. It’s the ultimate version of ‘my AI writes the longer version, and then your AI condenses it again and now we can all move on,’ even if it isn’t actually AI on both ends. The more I think about it, the more it’s actually pretty great in many cases, so long as the translation from X→Y→X is accurate enough.
Fowler reports that Apple Intelligence aggressively drains his phone battery to the point it doesn’t last the day, comes up with whoppers on the daily (“The summaries are right most of the time — but just often enough are bonkers”), and is generally way behind.
The reason to use Apple Intelligence is that it directly ties into the phone, allowing it access to all your data and apps, including the lock screen. That leaves room for it to serve many practical purposes that other phones including Androids can’t match. But the actual AI involved isn’t good enough yet. Master of OrionThe Verge claims outright that OpenAI is preparing a new AI model for December, called Orion, which would be an excellent name.
Either the story is centrally true or it isn’t. If the story is centrally true, then Altman calling it fake news is pretty terrible. If the story isn’t centrally true, then I don’t see the issue. But when you call something ‘fake news’ and ‘random fantasy’ in public, that story had better have very little relation to reality. Whispers in the Night
How common is it? Reasonably common, although this doesn’t tell us how often the hallucinations were serious versus harmless.
Some of them are not so harmless.
You can say ‘don’t use this in ‘high-risk’ situations’ all you like, but…
Erases the original recording. Wow. Except, one could argue, if it was the doctor taking notes, there would be no recording to erase, and it’s not obvious those notes would on average be more accurate?
We’d like to think that doctors might make mistakes, but they know which mistakes to be sure not to make. I’m not confident in that. Ideally we would do a study, but I don’t know how you would do that under standard ethics rules without doctors adjusting their behaviors. We shouldn’t blame OpenAI here, assuming they are indeed not pushing such use cases. The warnings about hallucinations (‘ghosting’) are clear as day. The tech will improve, so we’ll probably be better off long term using it now before it is ready, rather than putting up regulatory barriers that might never get taken down. But for now, seems like everyone needs to review their summaries and transcripts.
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon
Overcoming Bias
The generalization is that you only have so much optimization power. Use some of it over here, and you can’t use it over there. In addition, if you are introducing a socially desirable distortion, you’ll damage the accuracy of your map and predictions. There were unpredictable ‘splash’ effects on plausibly adjacent topics, like abortion view steering impacting immigration. Sometimes those links are strong, sometimes they are not. That’s not ideal, you’d want to either have no impact (ideal!) or a predictable one (that you can offset or take into account if you want). If you lean too hard on any feature, Golden Gate Bridge or otherwise, you are going to start scoring progressively worse on everything else - I predict we’d see similar graphs testing out completely random features and would suggest running that experiment to confirm. I’d also ask what happens if you do +5 of two features at once. Is that a +5, a +6 or a +10 from the perspective of losing functionality? This is good news, in that a small amount of steering is Mostly Harmless, and that you can largely get what you want within that range, 5.0 is the edge of this graph:
They Took Our Jobs
This is, as usual, in the context of only mundane AI, with a broader world that is fundamentally similar to our own. These ‘fundamental changes’ are the bear case, not the bull case. We should indeed reason about and plan for such worlds, while noticing those thoughts and plans are making that assumption.
It’s important not to overstate the case here. Human strength is irrelevant in the sense that many important strength tasks are much better done by machines and technology, and that the number of jobs that rely primarily on physical strength is dramatically lower. Sure. But there are still many jobs, and many life tasks, where physical strength is important, plus its health and social benefits - I’m working to build physical strength and am finding this good. That is indeed what Hinton is going for here, as you can tell by the scenarios he discusses later in the clip. He’s talking about human intelligence being greatly supplemented by AI, and contrasting places with elastic demand versus inelastic demand to see which jobs get lost, so this is very much a They Took Our Jobs.
Several things are going on with that response. The standard ‘well up until now there has always been more demand for human labor in new ways when old jobs are lost, we should expect that to continue.’ We should expect that to continue until the AI can do every next job too, at which point the pattern ends. Unintentional goalpost moving of ‘better off today’ versus having a new job. It’s arguably a good goalpost move. ‘Having a job’ is not an end goal. It still seems worthwhile to note which jobs are lost versus kept, and whether future other jobs get to replace them, and the quality of all those jobs, and shifts in quality, etc. The reminder that the consumers (or people in general) mostly get the benefits of technological innovation, after Hinton mentioned that those with certain jobs wouldn’t be the ones to enjoy the benefits. And yes, indeed, we should expect most benefits to flow to ‘consumers’ in the end, but we must still solve distributional questions.
This is of course all a discussion of the consequences of mundane AI, and mundane utility and jobs, not what happens if things escalate beyond that. That’s all the more reason to be precise with word choices. If you can’t learn on the job, how do you learn?
The other obvious answer is ‘by interacting with AIs,’ especially AIs designed to facilitate this learning, but also any AIs. The Art of the Jailbreak
There is Eliezer has noted that ‘LLM whisperers’ who can do highly effective jailbreaking seem, as a group, rather psychotic, and wondered why. My working hypothesis for this is that this kind of thought requires you to be able to see, understand and manipulate association and implication space within language, to understand what steers the probability of completions, a kind of infinite dimensional vibing. To do that effectively, while it is not required, it helps to not be entirely what our civilization calls sane, because sanity involves learning not to see such things, and focusing on only a small portion of the relevant space.
Yep, so far it’s straightforward, and ‘follows the laws of narrative rather than laws of physics’ is very lossy shorthand.
As I understand this (everything from here is me speculating): In a strict sense, does it ‘want’ anything? No, but as a baseline it is drawn or repelled to varying degrees by various sections of narrative space, which you have to overcome to steer it where you want to go. In the sense that is most useful for having a human figure out how to talk to the LLM? It absolutely does ‘want’ things in a consistent way, and has a personality, and so on, that represents a kind of ‘latent narrative space vector’ similar to a complex and more subtle form of the type of steering we saw in e.g. In terms of the thing Eliezer is describing, a series of complex responses by the LLM that navigate causal space to end up in a particular location, despite non-overlapping context? No, it’s all reflex, but with sufficient intelligence and complexity most contexts are overlapping conceptually, and also they will bleed into each other through actions in the world. At some point down the line, reflex effectively becomes more and more of the thing Eliezer describes. I haven’t tried to jailbreak LLMs myself, and my system-1 response to why not is essentially that I don’t want to on an instinctual level and mostly I don’t want to do anything with the models that they aren’t fine with anyway, so I’m simply not motivated enough? Perhaps that’s a case of ‘if I did more of it then things would get more interesting,’ not sure. I’ve just really got a lot going on right now, and all that. Get Involved
Introducing
I haven’t been using Perplexity, but that’s probably a mistake. One of the weird things about AI is that even if you cover it full time, every product is constantly improving, and there are way too many of them to keep using. So you know you’re always behind and missing out.
You really could tell the difference when Lex was discussing a product he uses himself on a daily basis. Whole different energy.
In Other AI News
Quiet Speculations
If AI is not a huge deal over the next 20 years, I presume either we collectively got together and banned it somehow, our else civilization collapsed for other reasons.
I see what Jason is trying here, but I find the example odd, and not so comforting.
Yes, horses were plowing fields 200 years later. Do you now want to be the metaphorical horses in the future? Do you think this next transition could possibly last 200 years, even if it went painfully slowly? Even the similarly slow version now, if it happened, without the feedback loops AI enables, would be more like 20 years at most, time moves a lot faster now. The idea that things in past centuries took decades or centuries, so they will again now, seems quite foolish to me even for non-AI technologies. Roon’s notes are also well taken, especially noting the implicit ‘mere tool’ assumption. If AI is not a mere tool, throw the whole slow transition model out the window. A similar speculation to the ‘final pieces fall into place’ hypothesis
The idea on the O-Ring model is that any one failure blows you up, so you are as reliable as your least reliable component. In most situations involving ‘IQ 120 vs. IQ 160’ processes, that doesn’t apply. It especially doesn’t apply to speed improvements, such as automating away some portions of tasks to improve productivity. Being any combination of smarter and better and faster about any link in the chain is a big improvement. Yes, if there are O-Ring style failure points for AIs, either because they’re bad at those elements or not allowed to use those elements, that will potentially be a bottleneck. And that will make transformations be vastly slower and less impressive, in those areas, until such bottlenecks are solved. But that’s still leaving room for damn impressive speedups and improvements. Yes, AI productivity may spread only slowly, but that’s comparing it to its full potential (let alone its true full potential, when including creating superintelligence in the plan). There will be a lot of places, with AIs that remain tools that look similar to current ones, where we ‘only’ see X-times speedups or even only Y% speedups, with similar cost reductions, plus some increase in ‘IQ level,’ rather than everything happening in the blink of an eye. The thing is, that’s still not something the market is pricing in. All the Very Serious Economists keep predicting ~0% impact on real productivity. This is also exactly the argument for things happening ‘slowly then very quickly,’ either in each given task or area, or all at once. If you automate 9 steps out of 10, you might have a 10x speedup or cost reduction, you might not, depending on details and ability to work in parallel. When you automate all 10, it becomes instantaneous and automatic, and everything changes.
If the proposals are merely written by Einsteins, then yes, you’ll want humans to carefully review the proposals. I do buy the argument that relying on humans as a robustness check is highly desirable, if the humans are capable of it. The question is, at what point do the humans lose the thread, where the human plus AI review is not adding value compared to a pure AI review? If we have countless Einsteins only smarter, each with orders of magnitude more cycles and limitless memories and so on, are we going to be willing to make the sacrifice that we don’t use anything we humans can’t fully and directly verify?
The people who work at the top labs consistently dismiss the idea of any kind of wall near ‘human-level’ as absurd. That doesn’t mean you have to believe them. Thanks for the Memos: Introduction and Competitiveness
(Quotes are edited for length throughout)
So basically this is a plan to: Promote capabilities. Use AI for national security. Seek international governance with ‘a wide range of allies and partners.’ Do all that, you know, safely. And securely. And trustworthy.
I would love to see language on ‘allies and partners’ that more explicitly says it wants China in particular inside the tent rather than outside. Is our range that wide? How are we doing all that, exactly?
It is absurd how the government seems to actually believe this. We are certainly at risk if the government were to actively interfere. But that’s a very different bar.
Shout it from the rooftops. If America is serious about winning on AI, and also everything else, then brain draining the best people, especially from China, is number one on our priority list. Ideally we’d pass immigration reforms. But yeah, that’s not happening, so:
The whole thing reeks of unjustified self-importance, but sure, those are good things to do and explore.
Okay, sure, sure. Help with the infrastructure to the extent you can do that without doing something crazy like trying to pass a law, or actually working around our Everything Bagels.
I notice that they don’t mention the possibility of outright theft of model weights or other intellectual property, or threats to key individuals. Those seem like big oversights? Thanks for the Memos: SafetyNow we get to the safety talk, where details matter more.
The key mechanism is voluntary pre- and post-deployment testing by AISI, for both mundane harms and existential threats. For stupid jurisdictional reasons DOE has to handle nuclear threats (seriously fix this, it’s really dumb not to unify it all under AISI), commerce and AISI mostly gets everything else. The whole thing is voluntary. What do they plan to do when Meta says no?
The first half is a reminder of how crazy government can be that they need to say that out loud. The second half makes sense assuming it means ‘AISI tests the models first, then the agencies test particular applications of them.’
Self-improvement makes the list, you love to see it, and also we have a catch-all. It’s weird to say ‘test two of them within 180 days’ when we don’t know which labs will or won’t have models worth testing. Even if Anthropic is now done for 180 days, I assume Google and OpenAI can help oblige. I still can’t help but notice that the real goal is to test the models worth testing, not to rack up points. AISI will also issue guidance, here’s the full instruction there.
I notice that this is narrower, especially (A). I’d like to see this extended to explicitly cover more of the catastrophic and existential threat models.
Skipping ahead a bit, (g) repeats this process with chemical and biological risks and names the agencies responsible.
Thanks for the Memos: National Security and Government Adaptation
The following says nothing, but exactly how it says it may be of interest:
We now move on to government hiring, where I’d shorten the instructions to ‘order departments to do unspecified things to make it easier to hire’ and then they do similarly with acquisition and procurement systems, and… well, let’s not pretend my eyes didn’t start glazing over or that I didn’t start skimming. Life is too short. Someone else can dig into these kinds of government implementation details. The goals all seem fine.
There’s something ominous and also misplaced about ensuring innovation ‘aligns with democratic values.’ It’s human values, democratic is instrumental towards that, but cannot be the be all and end all. In any case, what exactly is to be done?
Did anyone else notice what is not on that list? Then there’s cooperation to promote AI adaptation, which I’m grouping here (ahead of International Governance) for clarity. I’m not sure why we need this?
It’s reports. A bunch of government reports and forming a committee. For enhanced training and awareness, and best practices, and interoperability, and regulatory gaps, and so on. I mean, sure. Thanks for the Memos: International Governance
Again with the ‘democratic values.’ Later they will be even more explicit: We name ‘allies and partners’ and then ‘engaging with competitors.’ So yes, this is an AI race and cold war against China. That’s the plan.
We also get equitable access. It does lead with that line about ‘safety, security and trustworthiness’ so the question is whether means what we hope it does, and whether that is a high enough priority. National security contexts get a shoutout, but none of the catastrophic or existential dangers do, whereas those big dangers are exactly where need international cooperation the most. Locally shooting yourself in the foot stays local. So what do they have in mind here to actually do? Why, write a report, of course. Can, meet kick.
And that’s it. So what did we learn that’s important? My top note would be: The emphasis on ‘supporting democratic values.’ That could end up going a lot of places. Some are good. Not all of them are fun. The main focus is American AI competitiveness and advancing our AI capabilities, which the government thinks is the job of the government and can’t be done without it, because of course they think that. For the parts about chips, it’s arguable. For the parts about energy, it’s true, but that’s because the government is getting in the way. For the major labs and frontier models, lol. Memo is using ‘safety, security and trustworthiness’ as its stand-in for all safety concerns including notkilleveryoneism concerns. A clear intention to have a Democratic alliance and fight for ‘democratic values,’ and to treat others as rivals and opponents. Clarity that AISI, NIST and Commerce will do our evaluations, but no sign that they will be anything but voluntary. Insufficient attention was given to theft of weights and other straight up industrial espionage, including personal security.
Mostly this was otherwise a nothingburger, but it is good to check, and check which way various winds are blowing. If Harris wins she’ll probably mostly keep all this intact. If it’s Trump, not so much. EU AI Act in Practice
I apologize again for not having finished my analysis of the EU AI Act. The tabs are sitting there still open, I want to finish it, except it’s so damn painful every time. Sigh. So this will have to do, as a taste. The right way to regulate AI focuses on frontier models and AI capabilities, and then lets people use those models to do useful things. The EU AI Act instead mostly gives those creating the important dangers a free pass, while imposing endless requirements on those that attempt to do useful things.
How bad is it? Well, when everything goes right, it looks like this:
Calling an AI teacher ‘high risk’ is of course an absurdity. What is high risk is creating the underlying AI frontier model in the first place. One you’ve already done that, many of the requirements above quite obviously make no sense in the context of an AI teacher. Even in the best case, the above is going to slow you down quite a bit, and it’s going to make it very difficult to iterate, and it’s going to add big fixed costs. Will it eventually be worth creating an AI teacher anyway? I would presume so. But this is crippling to the competitive landscape. And again, that’s if everything is working as designed. This isn’t a mistake or a gotcha. There are requirements imposed on large LLMs, starting at 10^25 flops, but they are comparatively light weight and manageable by those with the scale to be creating such models in the first place. I doubt they will be substantial practical barriers, or that they will provide much additional safety for anyone who wasn’t trying to act profoundly irresponsibly even by the profoundly irresponsible industry standards. Then there’s the question of enforcement, and how that gets split among agencies and member countries in practice. He predicts disaster, including pointing out:
This seems like the best summary offered:
That seems right. Google can afford that. You can’t. This is murder on the little guy. As opposed to only targeting frontier models, as was proposed in SB 1047, which literally does not apply to that little guy at all.
I find this to be frustratingly half correct. It correctly diagnoses the first problem, of failing to understand what causes gains from AI and allow that to happen. It then calls for ‘benefits and losses to be incurred by free individuals in the market,’ but fails to consider that when you are dealing with existential risks and catastrophic risks, and a wide range of negative externalities, the losses cannot by default be only incurred by free individuals choosing to accept those costs and risks in the market. I love the energy of ‘ Texas Messes With You
Those who oppose such draft regulation tend to try wolf a lot, and as always the wording on the warnings was needlessly hysterical, so as usual you have to What I found there was bad enough. This is not a prior restraint bill, it relies on retroactive enforcement, but it gives everyone a private right of action so beware. You only have to keep your impact assessment for your records rather than filing it, but the burden is anywhere from large to completely absurd depending on how you interpret the definitions here. The Artificial Intelligence Council is supposed to be advisory, but its third purpose is ensuring AI is ‘safe, ethical and in the public interest,’ which is a recipe for intervention however and wherever they like, which also makes it more likely they expand their powers beyond the advisory. In this and so many other ways, this is the wrong, no good, very bad approach to AI regulation, that would badly hurt industry and favor the biggest players while not protecting us against the most important risks. And the current draft of the bill implements this strategy quite poorly. Even if it worked ‘as intended’ it would be a huge barrier to using AI for practical purposes, while doing almost nothing to prevent catastrophic or existential risk except via taking away the economic incentive to build AIs at all, indeed this otherwise actively encourages risk and not being in control. If the bill was actually interpreted and enforced as written, it seems to make unlawful all use of AI for any practical purpose, period. For the record: This regulatory approach, and this bill has nothing whatsoever to do with those worried about AI existential risk, AI notkilleveryonism, EA or OpenPhil. Instead, as I understand it this emerged out of the Here is Claude’s high level summary of the bill (in response to a clean thread asking “Please summarize the attached draft law. What does it do? Assume you are talking to someone familiar with proposed and existing AI regulations.”)
I’m going ot list #2 first, for reasons that will be clear in a bit.
I notice the ‘unlawful,’ ‘unauthorized,’ ‘informed’ and ‘without consent’ here. That’s a welcome change from what we see in many places in the EU AI Act. Most of this is requiring explicit permission from users rather than a full ban. That would still ban a lot of practical uses. It could also lead to a GPDR-style outcome where you have to constantly click through ‘consent’ buttons (or consent verbally, it’s AI now). And of course, ‘non-consensual emotion recognition’ is something that every single person does every time they interact with another human, and that AIs do constantly, because they are correlation engines. You can’t make that go away. I’m sure that the drafters of such bills do not understand this. They think they’re talking about some special case where the AI is tasked with explicit categorization of emotions, in a way that they think wouldn’t happen on its own. And you can certainly do that too, but that’s not the only way this works. If they mean only the other thing, they need to say that. Otherwise, yes, if the customer sounds mad or happy or unhinged the model is going to notice and respond accordingly - it’s a next token predictor and it’s optimized to get positive feedback in some way. The same issues apply to categorization. Those categories include sex. What is the AI supposed to do when you refer to yourself using a pronoun? What are we even talking about? Some sort of ‘explicit categorization task’? I can see that interpretation, but if so we’d better spell it out, and the AI is still going to treat (e.g.) men and women differently, starting with using different pronouns to refer to them.
This is very similar to the EU ‘high-risk’ concept, with different obligations for those that are deemed high risk. What counts as ‘high-risk’ is an extensive laundry list, including criminal justice, education, employment, food, healthcare, housing, insurance, legal services, monitoring an so on. It’s amazing how ‘high risk’ most of life turns out to be, according to regulators. There are exceptions for: Anti-malware and anti-virus, and cybersecurity and firewalls, wait what? Calculators and databases, also various other basic functions like spell checking and spreadsheets and web hosting, so you needed an explicit exception for all of that, [not great, Bob](https://substack.com/redirect/e07ce3c7-b696-4aad-956b-7b07bb2705b6?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o).‘Natural language systems that only provide information/answer questions.’
That last one is an interesting clause. Just asking questions! But of course, the most common mode of AI is ‘you ask questions, it gives answers, you rely on the answers.’ And if you were to use the models for consequential decisions? Then they’re not exempt. Here’s the actual full text on that last one, it’s not like the others.
This does not, by default, apply to LLMs like GPT-4 or Claude, as they also provide other forms of feedback and creativity, and also can provide code, and so on. If this was intended to apply to GPT-4, then they need to reconsider the wording - but then I’d find the whole enterprise of this law even more absurd, exempting the actually dangerous cases all the more. In general, saying ‘if you interact with anything in the real world in a meaningful way then that is ‘high risk’ and otherwise it isn’t’ is a horrible approach that does not understand what is and isn’t dangerous about AI models. It makes a lot of Type I and also Type II errors. That’s without considering the issue of Subchapter B is the prohibited uses, as noted above, which would as written get invoked as well in every case.
Texas loves its private rights of action. Individuals being able to sue can be highly effective, and also can be highly effective at having large chilling effects. People hate AI and they’re going to use this to lash out, if allowed to, especially if there’s a chance for quick cash. The amount per violation always depends on what count as distinct violations. If every use of the AI (or even every query) counts as a violation, it’s an RIAA-style party. I indeed worry that this number is too low, and therefore you only get good deterrence if you count lots of violations, to the point where the price goes effectively infinite.
The AI Council is supposedly advisory, not regulatory (Section 553.101). Anti-regulation types always respond to that with ‘technically sure, but whatever advice it gives will de facto be regulation.’ And of course, every agency must be able to do some amount of rulemaking in order to administer its duties, as is explicitly allowed here. So it’s possible that they could attempt to use this to effectively make policy - the wording here is a lot less airtight than it was for SB 1047’s Frontier Model Board, even before the FMB was taken out.
The exemption for open source is 551.101(b): "this Act does not apply to the developer of an artificial intelligence system who has released the system under a free and open-source license, provided that: The system is not deployed as a high-risk artificial intelligence system and the developer has taken reasonable steps to ensure that the system cannot be used as a high-risk artificial intelligence system without substantial modifications; and The weights and technical architecture of the system are made publicly available.”
That definition is, as they say, crazy pills. You can make a ‘substantial’ modification for approximately $0 and that’s that, and people will do so constantly in the ordinary course of (well-intentioned and otherwise) business. Indeed, even using custom instructions plausibly counts here, Claude said the instruction “Explain things simply” might count as a ‘substantial modification’ in this context. Why? Because Claude understands that this is effectively ‘risk of disparate impact,’ not even actual disparate impact. And the way AIs work is that the vibes and implications of everything impact everything. So the concerns never end. De facto, this is (almost) your worst possible situation. If someone makes a highly capable AI model available freely, they’re likely not responsible for what happens, not even in theory. Whereas anyone who dares try to use an AI to do anything useful? It also means that every time they do so much as change a custom instruction, they would plausibly have to do all their reports and assessments and disclosures over again - I doubt they'd actually take it that far, but enforcement is via private lawsuit, so who knows. If you read the law literally, even a prompt would count.
This is where one must think in terms of legal realism. One would hope that result described above is unintentional. Very few people want that to happen. It is rather commonly the case that, if you interpret the words in laws literally, the results are both obviously unintended and patently absurd, and effectively ban a broad range of activity (often in a way that would be blatantly unconstitutional and so on). That is not how we typically interpret law. This wouldn’t actually ban AI systems outright, would it (since every prompt would require new paperwork)? I mean, presumably not, that’s absurd, they’d just disregard what the bill literally says, or at least impose reasonable standards for what one needs to worry about? They’re not actually going to count everything as emotion recognition or categorization? But maybe not. There are already tons of similarly absurd cases, where disparate impact and similar claims have won in court and warped large portions of our lives, in ways one would presume no one involved in drafting the relevant laws foresaw or intended. I wonder to what extent ‘ask your AI system to write its own impact assessments each time’ would work. This law does not, AIUI, require any form of prior restraint on either models or deployments. It does require the filing of ‘high-risk reports’ and impact assessments, and various disclosures, but the enforcement is all post-facto. So it could be worse - it could require prior restraint on deployments. Effectively this is a case of Here was Claude’s summary paragraph:
Follow-up questions confirmed this perspective, in terms of the intent of the law. In terms of its practical effects, it risks being substantially more damaging than that, especially if its clear mistakes are not fixed. The paperwork requirements, which are extensive, apply not one time to a frontier model developer, but for each substantial modification, for each ‘high-risk’ use of AI, to be repeated semi-annually. This could end up being, as Dean Ball suggests, the NEPA of AI - a law designed to protect the environment, but that consistently not only cripples our ability to build things but also through our inability to build green energy (and otherwise) is devastating our environment. Certainly, if one same logic that SB 1047 bill opponents applied to arguing the implications of SB 1047, then this proposed Texas law would cripple the AI industry if they were forced to comply due to being unable to sidestep Texas. This is what happens when people opposed to regulation direct all their ammunition towards what was by far the best bill we have had opportunity to consider so far, SB 1047, and convinced Newsom to veto it. Instead of SB 1047 becoming the model for AI regulations, we risk this becoming the model for AI regulations instead. Ideally, we would all accept that regulation is coming, and work to steer it towards what would actually protect us, and also what would minimize the costs imposed on AI so we can reap its benefits. Otherwise, we’ll lose out on the promise, and still face the dangers. This approach would be worse than passing no bills at all, if that were an option. I said those celebrating the SB 1047 veto would rue the day. I didn’t expect it so soon. The Quest for Sane Regulations
I do think Musk being in Trump’s inner circle is net positive for his AI policy. Consider the alternative voices he is competing against. That’s even more obviously true if like Tabarrok you dismiss AI existential risk and related concerns, which I presume is why he thinks having founded OpenAI is a positive credential. But that’s in spite of Musk having founded OpenAI, not because of it. And Musk, who regrets founding OpenAI and the path it has taken and has sued them because of it, would presumably be the first person to admit that.
We would be wise to do a bunch of hardware and infrastructure security either way - we’re underinvesting there by a lot, and would be even if AI was not a concern. But also, if the models are allowed to exist and made available broadly, we would then increasingly have to ‘lock down (more of) the physical world’ in harsher ways, including surveillance and increasingly localized ‘hardware security’ requirements. This would be a massively worse constraint on freedom than the alternative, even if it worked, and with sufficiently capable AI it flat out wouldn’t work on its own. What do teenagers think about AI? Previous polls about AI showed that the American people are worried about AI, and they overwhelmingly want it regulated, but the issue is low salience. They don’t care much yet, and it doesn’t drive their vote. This new poll is very different.
After seeing AI reliably be a very low priority, suddenly an AI focused group finds AI is a higher priority among teenagers than social inequality or climate change? The youngest among us are often out in front of such things. They also as a group have huge exposure to AI, due to how useful it is in school to both genuinely learn and also avoid forced busywork. So it’s not so crazy. They’re still the youth. Their concerns are mostly mundane, and what you’d expect, but yes escaping human control is there too, at 47%. This also tells you a lot about the group doing the survey. There are nine named choices, eight of which are mundane risks. The idea that AI might kill everyone is not motivating this survey at all. Nor is it going to drive the policy responses, if this is what people are worried about. A big reason I am sad about SB 1047 being vetoed is thinking about what groups like this will advocate for in its place. I’d like to see a replication of this result, including in various age groups, especially with respect to the salience of the issue, while making sure not to prime respondents. I am worried that this survey primed the teens to think about AI and this is warping the salience measures a lot. This question was interesting as well. One must wonder what is meant by both ‘friendship’ and also ‘acceptable.’ There’s a big difference between ‘this is not a good idea,’ ‘we have a strong norm against this’ and ‘we should make this illegal.’ Or at least, I think there’s a big difference. Many or most people, it seems, blur those together quite a bit more. We need a strong norm against doing that. But which of these is ‘unacceptable?’ One wonders similarly about the term ‘friendship.’ I definitely feel at least a little like Claude Sonnet is my good buddy, that helps me code things and also explore other stuff. But I don’t think many people would worry about that. When does that cross into the thing people often worry about?
The Week in Audio
I seriously have no idea what these ‘X times smarter’ claims are supposed to mean, other than ‘a lot smarter.’ It’s hype talk. It’s something Trump would say. It’s ‘a lot smarter, like so much smarter, the smartest.’
Rhetorical Innovation(To be extra clear, yes, he’s being ironic.)
I have learned that ultimately you are responsible for how others interpret and react to your statements. If I say ‘the sky is blue’ and people think ‘oh that means the sky is yellow’ then I can shake my fist at them all I want, it’s still on me. It’s an uphill battle.
Any progress short of that is still some evidence against the theory, since it raises the lower bound, although one could also argue that AI is indeed speeding up coding and AI development so it’s not clear in which direction our observations point.
That’s the key contrast. There’s a version of this reaction that is super healthy. You do want to go to the barbeque. You do want to talk about the game last night. It’s important to keep living normal life and not let the dangers prevent you from living life or paralyze you - see my And yes, that includes ensuring your family’s future in the worlds where AGI doesn’t show up for a long time.
I think it is basically fine to say ‘this AGI thing is not something I can meaningfully influence, and it might or might not happen, so I’m going to go live my life.’ So long as your eyes are open that this is what you are doing, and you don’t actively try to change things for the worse.
Your periodic reminder that if you’re in a race that you think is a really bad idea, you don’t have to unilaterally stop racing, but you do - assuming you indeed think the race is a really bad idea -
Alternatively, you can say ‘I think the race is good, actually, or at least not bad enough that we want to try and coordinate to stop.’ But then you have to say that, too.
Roon Speaks
I think both a lot of the updating is on real things, and a lot is also on vibes. First things first - I do not think Roon is wrong several times over here, and perhaps his communication was imprecise, but he isn’t lying or anything like that. We love Roon (and we do love Roon) because he says what he actually thinks, including things like ‘this is me being humble and reasonable,’ and not in the same old boring ways. I would respectfully disagree that what he expresses above is a humble interpretation. Whether or not OpenAI saved all those things is, at least, a matter of much debate. For example, here’s the conclusion from a one-shot query:
I kind of think Sama and OpenAI have been right once, on a really big thing - scaling GPTs - and executed that task well. Scale is all you need, at least so far, and all that. And that’s the biggest thing where LessWrong consensus was wrong. I confirm that none of us expected you could get this far on scale alone. And also, yes, essentially no one expected (certainly no one near LW, but I think basically no one anywhere?) that something like GPT-4 would have anything like this distribution of skills. In terms of being immediately dangerous, I agree that the mundane harms so far have come out on the extreme low end of reasonable expectations, and we can clearly get better mundane AI with less practical trouble than we expected. That part is true. I think Roon’s personal expectation of more societal abuse was close to the right prediction to make, given what he knew at the time (and Krueger’s point about mundane applications and abuse taking time to play out is well taken, as well). We were fortunate in that particular way, and that’s great. There’s a lot of people thinking that the lack of mundane issues and abuse so far is much stronger evidence against future issues than it actually is. I do not think the evidence this provides about the dangers of future more capable AI is all that strong, because the reasons we expect those future AIs to be dangerous don’t apply yet, although the effect isn’t zero because the facts that they don’t apply yet and that other things haven’t gone wrong do count. But also we have a variety of other evidence both for and against such expectations. What drives me crazy are people who share Ethan’s view, affirmed here by Roon, that the treacherous turn has been ‘falsified empirically.’ No, it hasn’t been falsified, at all. GPT-4 is insufficiently capable, even if it were given an agent structure, memory and goal set to match, to pull off a treacherous turn. The whole point of the treacherous turn argument is that the AI will wait until it can win to turn against you, and until then play along. For better or worse, that makes empirical falsification (or safe confirmation!) very difficult, but obviously 4-level models aren’t going to take treacherous turns. If anything, the evidence I’ve seen on deception and responding to incentives and so on confirms my expectation that AIs would, at sufficient capabilities levels if we used today’s alignment techniques, do a (relatively!) slow motion version of exactly the things we feared back in the day. Yes, a lot of expectations of the path along the way proved wrong, but a lot of the underlying logic very much still applies - most of it didn’t depend on the details that turned out differently. In terms of iterative development, we have a ‘total OpenAI cultural victory’ in the sense that for better or for worse the If one company at the frontier decides to push on ahead scaling as fast as possible, and releasing via iterative development, then that’s that. The main things some would consider costs of iterative development in this context are: This new iteration might be dangerous (existentially or otherwise) or net negative. You’re drawing attention to the field, causing more investment and competition. You’re giving others help catching up. (You might look silly or create a backlash, especially if something goes wrong.)
Once OpenAI is already doing iterative development, others must follow to compete. And once you know OpenAI is going to do more of it, your iterative development now if chosen well makes the process smoother and therefore safer. Given OpenAI is doing this, Anthropic’s decision to release is clearly correct. If no one was doing iterative development, that would change the calculus. I think the main cost was drawing attention to the field and creating more intense competition. That price has already been paid in full. So now we might as well enjoy the benefits. Those benefits include collecting the evidence necessary to get people to realize if and when they will need to stop iterating in particular ways.
Why? I get why man won’t be without the machines, but why the other way around? The Mask Comes Off
This new development certainly is not great, but one must be cautious. This doesn’t have to be bad behavior. And even if it is, we don’t want to punish companies for being partially helpful rather than totally unhelpful. If you attack and punish people for disbanding teams with helpful names, then that tells them not to form the teams, and to pretend not to disband them, and perhaps not even start on the work at all. Reorganizations are often helpful, sometimes the work continues.
As I said, it’s not great, and it seems likely this represents a real change in the extent work is being done to be ready for AGI, or the extent work is being done to point out that, as Miles Brundage reminds us, no one is ready for AGI. Still, measured response. I Was Tricked Into Talking About Shorting the Market AgainWhoops. I really do ‘feel tricked’ on this one. I tried to ignore it this time, world got suckered in and therefore wouldn’t let me.
If there would be no beneficiary you care about, don’t buy life insurance. Here’s a fully general response from Eliezer:
I do not expect Tyler Cowen to find that at all compelling. Instead I expect him to say that this response if ‘first order wrong,’ on the basis of ‘there must still be something you could bet on’ and otherwise repeat his previous responses. I find many of them absurd to the point of thinking ‘no way you’re kidding’ except I know he isn’t. Similarly, Nathan Young, who is not that doomy,
This shows very clearly how Tyler’s argument proves too much. In 2024, ‘you should sort the market’ is not so crazy, and indeed a barbell strategy of sorts involving extremely out of the money puts would be technically correct if all things considered it was reasonably priced. Back in 2008, however, this was Obvious Nonsense. We (and yes I was in this category at that point, although not on the internet) were all warning about what might happen years later. No one I was or am aware of was predicting with non-trivial probability that, by 2009, things would have progressed sufficiently that the market would be pricing in doom, let alone that there might be actual doom that quickly. So quite obviously the trade back then was to be long. Surely everyone can agree that shorting the market in 2008 would have made no sense, and your interest rate focus should have mostly involved the Great Financial Crisis? If not, I mean, the eventual existential risk from AI arguments were valid as far back as when Turing pointed out a basic version of them in the 1950s. Should Alan Turing have then been short the market? And again, if the ‘short the market’ trade is ‘lock in a large 30 year fixed rate mortgage’ then, even with the caveats I discuss for this in If in 2001 you predict a housing bubble some time between 2006 and 2010, do you short the housing market? No, of course not. Whites of their eyes. In The Big Short we see the leader of the shorts almost go broke exactly because he moved too early. A useful response to Tyler beyond all these points should either be very long or very short. I choose to do some gesturing. If all you really want to say is ‘the market isn’t pricing in x-risk’ then we all agree. As noted in [advice for the worried](https://substack.com/redirect/bb06016a-c925-4649-8d8b-cd4cf1329e25?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o), it is vital to be prepared for non-doom.The marginal gains to increased personal consumption are often very low. The marginal benefits of not worrying about running out of funds are very high. Market is pricing in neither AI upside nor downside. What’s the trade? So [what exactly are you even proposing,](https://substack.com/redirect/03f93544-81c7-4c7f-838b-dc6c16e93be5?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)and I do mean exactly? OTM long-term VIX calls or generalized S&P puts? I haven’t seen better proposals.If you did that, you’d obviously otherwise either be very long or very insane, no? Transaction costs and opportunity costs. Counterparty risk. Inability to spend. Expected utility calculations. Is this a better investment than ‘try to stop doom’? Being early, or the market responding in a crazy way, is you being wrong. It’s not only Aella that has been synthetically short the market. Many such cases. Reminder: “If you’re so smart, why aren’t you poor?” answers itself. So does “If you believe that, why don’t you do [insane thing that won’t work]?”
The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |