---
subject: "The end of lead"
from: "Works in Progress <worksinprogress@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-07-03 12:46:34
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Works in Progress"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_1644361085112560554"]
---
This is an article from the new issue of Works in Progress, Clare Donaldson, Lauren Gilbert, and James Hu explain how to eliminate lead everywhere Lead has been a part of human life for more than eight thousand years. Though relatively rare in the Earth’s crust, lead is easy to extract and it’s useful: easy to shape, bend, and melt. Human use of lead began in the Neolithic, long before humans figured out how to mold iron or copper or bronze. Mining of the mineral had begun by 6500 BC, as humans began to forge coins and fishing weights and ornaments from this dull, soft metal. Usage scaled up over the next several millennia; by the height of the Roman empire humans were mining Nor were the Romans the last to find new uses for lead, even though production fell in the latter half of the first millennium. In the Middle Ages it found its way into stained glass and cosmetics. By the Renaissance lead’s easy-to-mold nature made it perfect for the moveable type of printing presses. By the Industrial Revolution, lead mining had once again reached Roman heights. And humans just kept coming up with new uses for it. In the 1920s tetraethyl lead was added to gasoline to reduce engine knock (a loud, juddering effect caused by uncontrolled fuel combustion in high-compression engines).¹ Leaded gasoline spread quickly; by the 1970s, global lead production hovered at around Today, we no longer use leaded gasoline, but lead remains a key part of modern life. Lead is the world’s If lead were benign this would be a story of technological success: ingenuity leading to more and better usages of a mineral that we’ve known about for thousands of years. Unfortunately, it is not. Two thousand years ago, even the Romans With two thousand years more of medical knowledge, we can be more precise about lead’s impact on the body. If you ingest lead, it is absorbed through the gut; if you inhale it, it enters through the lungs. From there, it passes into the bloodstream, where it is deposited into the bones and organ tissues. If it stayed there, perhaps lead exposure could be ignored. But, like all body systems, the bones are not static. Lead re-enters blood in the churn and change of resorption, the nonstop process that dissolves the bones’ contents into the bloodstream as part of the metabolic replacement of old bone tissue with new. Once released into the bloodstream lead harms the endothelial cells that line the inner walls of blood vessels, while causing a different type of cell – known as vascular smooth muscle cells – to proliferate, simultaneously These processes, in combination, substantially raise the risk of conditions like high From the blood, lead also slips into the brain. The blood-brain barrier, which protects the neural tissue from most toxins, lets lead through principally because lead ions chemically resemble calcium ions, vital to the proper functioning of brain cells. Once in the brain, lead This can cause While both adults and children can suffer severe consequences from lead exposure, it is generally young children who receive the most exposure and who suffer the gravest consequences.² To begin with, normal play and hand-to-mouth behavior make young children much more likely than other groups to ingest lead from sources like dust and soil, which can Most things that sicken children leave evidence for parents and doctors. But children exposed to lead don’t have a giveaway fever, or rash, or cough. There is no way for parents to tell that their children have been exposed, only the silent accumulation of cellular damage that, down the line, can cause long-term disease and impaired brain functioning. Perhaps unsurprisingly, as human lead use ramped up, so too did human exposure to lead. By the 1980s, it's estimated that people were exposed to One of the first people to highlight this as a problem was a geologist named Clair Patterson. His research required him to take precise measurements of how much of each element was in a given sample. But all of his experiments kept turning up too much lead because lead was in everything. His students would accidentally contaminate experiments because environmental lead lingered on their hands and clothing.³ In one Patterson started a By then, Patterson’s article had angered the industry-sponsored groups researching lead’s health effects. In a December 1965 symposium, Robert Kehoe, one of the foremost toxicologists of the time, Within a few years, though, the evidence started to build up that Patterson, not Kehoe, was right. In 1967, an epidemiological And in 1979, a landmark As all of this evidence accumulated, Americans began to reconsider the harms of lead. By 1970, the US Congress had passed the In November 1973, the EPA
Progress was slower elsewhere. In 2002, more than 100 countries – including almost all of Africa – The problem was not that lead was extremely useful in fuel. Reformulating fuel to use a different anti-knocking agent is relatively simple. The inventor of leaded fuel had Rather, lead stayed in fuel due to a misconception. Many people believed that unleaded fuels were not backwards compatible and that using unleaded fuel required a car to have a catalytic converter. Since these were introduced relatively recently, cars in poorer countries often did not have one, and policymakers worried about this new fuel causing issues. However, this wasn’t true. Leaded gasoline damages catalytic converters; it was In the course of Following meetings with Egyptian ministers and the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation where USAID offered scientific information and technical assistance to help shift existing oil refineries toward lead-free, the Egyptian government assessed the economic impact of a total transition and made implementing it Global phase-out of leaded gasoline in road vehicles Number of countries that have banned the use of leaded gasoline in road vehicles In 2002, the United Nations Environment Program It didn’t take much time – or money – to deliver results. In 2006, just four years after the launch of the partnership, leaded gasoline Lead, then, may seem like a problem of the past. With leaded paint and leaded gasoline gone, to most people in rich countries, lead seems like one of those regrettable but resolved twentieth-century mistakes, like indoor smoking and high rates of industrial pollution. Today, the average blood lead level in children in the US is just 0.83 micrograms per deciliter, a twenty-fold decline since the 1970s. Levels above 3.5 micrograms per deciliter are considered grounds for intervention, where Reducing lead exposure in the US has not been all sunshine and roses. It is expensive to replace lead pipes, and Even at the height of that crisis, the exposure level was far less than historical levels. In 2015, the average child in Flint had a blood level of It is still likely to take decades to truly eliminate lead exposure among US children. But things have already Elsewhere the story is worse. Data is sketchy, but everything we have suggests that children in low and middle income countries are still exposed to staggering amounts of lead. In 2019, a team of researchers attempted to put together estimates of lead exposure outside of Europe. They Since lead damages the brain it limits potential in later life. In most cases, the harms are relatively minor when considered at the level of a single child. A child in a low- or middle-income country might earn 0.5 percent less than they would have if they had not been exposed to any lead in childhood. But when one considers how many children are exposed to lead, the total costs of lead exposure are very large. And because lead exposure is so common, minor harm ‘in most cases’ still makes it one of the world’s top killers. A 2023 Why are there still so many deaths from lead? The United Nations Environment Program and partners may have helped eliminate lead from gasoline around the world, but other sources of lead that have been eliminated in rich countries remain very common in low- and middle-income countries. Let us consider lead in paint. The use of lead in paint was banned in the US in
The situation is worse than these statistics would suggest. In some countries that have banned lead paint on paper, it is still commonly available in the marketplace. Pakistan formally bans lead paint, but lead paints for home use, where they are prized for ease and durability, are still Cosmetics, too, were once a common source of exposure to lead in rich countries. Queen Elizabeth I used The lead-acid batteries that are used in many vehicles and nearly all backup power systems almost all use recycled lead. In rich countries, this recycling process is very safe and performed with In recent decades, these informal lead-acid battery recycling operations have proliferated in low and middle income countries. There are some 10,000 to 30,000 of them according to a No one really knows how much of global lead exposure comes from any one source, and it’s quite possible high levels of lead exposure come from a combination of them. We do know, though, that it is possible to reduce lead exposure; after all, rich countries already have. There exist other dyes for eye makeup besides lead sulfide, and there are many modern paints that do not use lead. Leaded products are not even much cheaper than other alternatives on a direct cost basis, and when we additionally consider the social costs of using lead, they become far and away more expensive overall. It is not clear exactly how much it would cost to remove lead from cosmetics, spices, and paint, and reform the battery recycling industry, but it is likely to be less than one percent of global GDP. Reducing lead exposure would pay for itself. So if we know lead is bad, and removing it would likely pay for itself in the long term, why are any children still being exposed to lead? Lead is a silent killer. When a child gets malaria, or is underweight, or is struggling in school, both parents and governments know that there is something wrong and that something needs to be done. But there are no immediate symptoms from lead exposure. Slowly, inexorably, lead exposure damages the health and prospects of young children around the world, and most of the time, neither their parents nor governments are aware of it. In some countries we can only guess how many children are exposed to lead in their childhood; the data simply has not been collected. Consider Bhutan as an example. Before this year, there were some indications that Bhutanese children were likely exposed to lead, but the data was limited. This conclusion was based on a 2020 Bhutan is not the only country like this. Most developing nations still need to accurately measure how common lead exposure is and where the exposure is coming from. Without this country-specific knowledge of the problem, governments can be reluctant to act. But with it, they might. In early 2021, Malawi’s Bureau of Standards had its own Bhutan moment when top officials met with a team from the Lead Exposure Elimination Project (LEEP), which one of us jointly leads. LEEP had been working with the University of Malawi to test some of the country’s most common paint brands and had found that 67 percent of the samples contained lead. This startled Malawi’s regulators, who had assumed that lead in paint was an outdated technology (understandable, given how many countries have banned it). Without that awareness, and with a tight budget and many other priorities to address, they hadn't recognized the importance of testing for lead in paint. Further, the equipment they had to test for lead was broken, and the cash-strapped Bureau had not been prioritizing its repair. After LEEP shared its results, the Bureau moved quickly to implement a lead paint ban, and began sending warning letters to paint manufacturers within the year. By March 2022, they were running new tests, both with their own, now-repaired, equipment (LEEP helped them source a replacement part) and through an American lab for calibration. In theory, a lead paint ban should be simple: we know how to find it and there is no serious pro-lead constituency to hold back regulation. Even manufacturers usually aren’t aware of the damage they’ve caused and often happily adopt lead-free solutions when required to. But, even when political will is abundant, logistics can still be a challenge. Testing is expensive whether it entails buying specialized instruments or shipping samples to foreign labs; personnel across the country need hands-on training; procedures for testing must be established and ratified. When LEEP ordered the replacement part it helped the Bureau bypass a procurement process that could have delayed local testing by months. Manufacturers also struggle with supply chains. Two companies in Malawi struggled to find a lead-free red pigment they could actually import; LEEP helped them find an Indian supplier who could ship to them via South Africa, but it took multiple days and dozens of phone calls (and two months for the shipment to arrive). These weren’t the only obstacles in Malawi’s way, but in the end, all proved surmountable. As testing began, the Bureau worked with LEEP to issue a public statement pressing manufacturers to commit to a lead-free timeline; by the next day, one manufacturer was already fielding phone calls from furious customers. Growing consumer awareness also provoked a virtuous circle as manufacturers raced each other to go lead-free, knowing they could outsell competitors by offering safer paint. By 2023, the market share of lead paint had dropped by more than half, and it was hard to imagine that number going anywhere but down.⁴ Many global health problems are thorny and difficult. Lead, unusually, is not one of those. We already know how to reduce lead exposure. Rich countries have already done it. There is already a cost-effective playbook for how to get the lead out. We simply need to apply it to more of the world. Screen people, especially children, for lead levels in their blood. Find the major sources of lead exposure. Get the lead out of those sources, by partnering with governments to bolster regulations and helping manufacturers switch to lead-free alternatives. A lead-free future is possible for all children, and might be surprisingly easy to achieve. Clare Donaldson is the co-executive director of the Lead Exposure Elimination Project. Lauren Gilbert works on horizon scanning for Renaissance Philanthropy. James Hu is a program associate at Open Philanthropy. All opinions are the authors’ own. 1 The inventor of tetraethyl lead, Thomas Midgley, also invented chlorofluorocarbon aerosols. These 2 Very high doses of lead (over 60 micrograms per deciliter) can result in acute lead poisoning, which does cause symptoms. However, this is 3 It took Patterson decades of work, and building the cleanest laboratory in the world, to rid himself of this incidental environmental lead. Anyone entering the lab had to strip down to underwear and wear a new plastic suit, uncontaminated by the lead-filled world outside the lab. 4 UNICEF and Pure Earth were involved in a similar effort in Georgia. In 2019, the Georgian government found that 41 percent of children had blood lead levels above 5 µg/dL. In Georgia, one of the most common routes of exposure was through spices – vendors would add lead chromate to make spices more yellow. By 2021, lead had been virtually eliminated from spices in Georgia. Thanks for subscribing to |