---
subject: "The Monday Media Diet with Matjie Pride Maunatlala"
from: "\"Why is this interesting?\" <whyisthisinteresting@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-09-23 20:00:07
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "WITI"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_5752899537867939131"]
---
Pride is a friend of WITI and just took the role of CMO at Tell us about yourself. I live in the green, lush city of Cape Town in South Africa. Home feels like a city within a giant majestic nature reserve where ocean and mountain meet. I grew up in a township with hot and dry weather, little greenery and limited opportunities to be outside. I had no idea as a child how much I love being out in nature. I am so grateful I today I get to walk up a mountain or soak my feet in sand at any moment. I am definitely deep in my alignment era. I have been on a self-discovery walk for a few years living out my purpose to inspire and illuminate the purpose in others. Professionally, I work with an incredible (and oh so wholesome) group of people on a mission to reconnect people with nature and ultimately with their truest selves. I guess you could say I do not have a personal vs. professional story so to speak. Life just seems to be in holistic flow at the moment. May it long last. My curiosity and adventure at the moment is learning about my continent, Africa. There is so much to see, learn, oh and eat! Describe your media diet. I surround myself with people that are plugged in to world events and trends so they are my plug. I make one phone call each morning on my commute to work to different friends. It is a great way to stay in touch. Somewhere in that connect I learn a new relevant event I should know about. Most midweek mid mornings I scan the headlines from my selected local and international news outlets that I have pinned on Chrome. Everything from Business Day, Daily Maverick and Business Tech to CNN, BBC and the NY time. I only click into stories where I have seen the headline multiple times or those that the peak my interest. Instagram and TikTok are great for indulging my curiosity about news on architecture, design and holistic wellness. Weekends I am usually on a media fast however I still leave room for podcasts. I enjoy taking in recommendations for those. What’s the last great book you read? Kafka on the Shore by Haruki Murakami. My sister has been a Murakami enthusiast for years and I guess I never thought I would enjoy his books since she and I are so different. Two years ago I committed to only reading recommendations from loved ones as a way of reconnecting with who they are today. Get to know my people through their interests. I am so glad I did. Murakami is captivating. I indulged in both the written and the audio book. Something about Murakami’s sense of irony and humour also gave me insight into my sister’s sense of lightness about life. What are you reading now? I just started reading the Zulu Sharman: Dreams Prophecies and Mysteries written by Vusamazulu Credo Mutwa . This was a recommendation from a friend who’s spiritual journey feels to me like it mirrors mine. His intentional approach learning more about ancient African healing practices beyond our many cultures inspires me. This book is my way of tapping into that curiosity. What’s your reading strategy when you pick up a print copy of your favorite publication? I am always so giddy when I leave the bookstore with the publication in hand. It’s actually quite funny after all these years. I rarely make it home with it. I always stop for drink to page through it with silly excitement. I page through it slowly from cover to cover and take in the headings and visuals. I look out for my favourite contributors make a mental bookmark of their articles. I look at all the ads and geek out on what I think is clever copy. Then I put it down and feel fulfilled. Over the next few days I carry the publication around with me to read article after article when I stop at coffee shop or am early for meetings. I feel like it adds beauty to moments in my day. I usually start with my favourite contributors’ articles then the rest. Who should everyone be reading that they’re not? I think everyone should, every now and then, read whatever their partner or friend is reading. The connection from the conversations is such a vibe. What is the best non-famous app you love on your phone? The app is already famous but it was new to me. 1Giant Mind. I have been practicing meditation for years. At the beginning of the year life got overwhelming and I fell out of practice. The app has step by step practices that are easy to follow. I had never used any aid before and I found this helpful and full of insight I had not known about the practice of meditation. Plane or train? Plane. Some of my favourite (not always best) ideas come from the sky. What is one place everyone should visit? The Mont Rochelle Nature Reserve hiking trail in Franschhoek. It is an easy uphill climb. Once in the valley you are cocooned by the most incredible silence. As you walk, sounds start echoing through gently. Birds. Crickets. Flowing water. Then you feel a gentle breeze. Eventually you have a symphony of nature welcoming you home. This must be what walking with God feels like. Another is Trancoso in Brazil. A wholesome small village where time stands still. Tell us the story of a rabbit hole you fell deep into. I mentioned that I started taking reading recommendations from friends. I did not mention that the process needs to come with boundaries. Each time I received a new recommendation, I wanted to start the book immediately because the person sold it so well. Before I knew it I was on chapter 5 of 5 books. I am still working my way out of that rabbit hole. I am not sure if my method is working as I have since added audio books thinking it will help. It has not. (PM) — Thanks for reading, Noah (NRB) & Colin (CJN) & Pride (PM —
You're currently a free subscriber to |