---
subject: "The Two Day Rule, Great Questions, & More"
from: "\"Sahil Bloom's Curiosity Chronicle\" <sahil@sahilbloom.com>"
to: ""
date: 2022-10-28 13:06:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Sahil Bloom", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_1989028747625928812", "UNREAD"]
---
The Two Day Rule, Great Questions, & Moreread and listen on Welcome to the new members of the curiosity tribe who have joined us this week. Join the 127,000+ others who are receiving high-signal, curiosity-inducing content every single week.
Today at a Glance:- Quote: Choosing your attitude.
- Framework: The Two-Day Rule.
- Tweet: Questions to ask daily.
- Article: An end to doomerism.
- Podcast: Diary of a CEO.
Today's newsletter is brought to you by The best way to simplify project management With Bambee, you get access to your own dedicated HR Manager starting at just $99 per month. They’re available by phone, email, and real-time chat so onboarding and terminations run smoothly, team members reach peak performance, and your business stays compliant with changing HR regulations. And with Bambee’s HR Autopilot you’ll automate important HR Practices, like setting policies, training, and feedback. HR managers can easily cost EIGHTY grand a year, but Bambee starts at $99 dollars per month. Get your free HR audit today to learn how much Bambee can take off your plate.
One Quote:“Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.” - Victor Frankl You can’t control your circumstances, but you can control how you react to them. One Framework:The Two Day RuleThere are two relevant facts about me to consider: - I am fascinated by the art and science of personal growth.
- I am a natural idealist forcing myself to become more of a realist.
The first fact means, as you'd expect, that I love to think and write about frameworks, tools, and strategies for creating growth. The second fact means that my natural idealism often bleeds into the frameworks, tools, and strategies I share, making them a bit intimidating or overwhelming to the non-idealist reader. I'm working on it—and you'll see me striking this balance of idealism and realism in these frameworks in the weeks, months, and years ahead. Today's framework is one such example. If you've been reading my content for a while, you'll know that one of my favorite strategies for making progress on literally anything is my For the uninitiated, "30-for-30" just means you do the thing you're trying to improve at for 30 minutes per day for 30 straight days. As I explain in the piece linked above, there are three core advantages to the approach: - Meaningful Commitment: 30 days of effort is meaningful enough that you can't be half-in, half-out.
- Manageable Commitment: 30 minutes of effort is light enough that it shouldn't feel intimidating.
- Effective Compounding: 900 minutes of accumulated effort is enough to improve meaningfully at literally anything.
The approach has worked wonders for me, but I've become aware that it's an idealist's approach, as it requires daily effort that may not be possible as "life happens" on a day-to-day basis. Furthermore, depending on your personality, the approach may create stress, as failing to hit a day (due to any number of random occurrences) can feel like a failure. Enter the Two Day Rule—a realists approach to consistent progress that I first learned about in a The Two Day Rule is simple: With whatever activity you are trying to make progress around, you don't allow yourself to take off more than one day in a row. Rather than 30 straight days of Xs (as required by my 30-for-30 Approach), your Two Day Rule calendar may look something like this: I love this strategy because it will create forward progress but allows for the vagaries of life to enter without derailing your approach and mental state. If you've found the 30-for-30 Approach too steep a hill to climb, I highly recommend trying the Two Day Rule in November. Give it a shot and let me know what you think. I'd love to hear about your progress with it. Reply to this email or tweet at me @SahilBloom and I'll do my best to get back to everyone. One Tweet:
I often comment that the most successful people in the world achieved their success not by having all the right answers—but by asking the right questions. This list of questions is wonderful. A few of my favorites: - Do I really need to answer this text or email right now? Urgent is very rarely actually urgent. By constantly
[manufacturing urgency](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/5qux9883lpf7hv0e7e5s6/vqh3hrhnzq00orag/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci90aGUtMi10eXBlcy1vZi10aW1lLWJ1eWluZy10aGUtZGlwLW1vcmU=), we limit our progress on the important. - Am I doing/not doing this out of fear? Fear distorts our reality. Being deliberate about
[deconstructing our fears](https://click.convertkit-mail4.com/5qux9883lpf7hv0e7e5s6/l2hehmho8d22l9c6/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2FoaWxibG9vbS5jb20vbmV3c2xldHRlci9ob3ctdG8tY29ucXVlci15b3VyLWZlYXJzLWZpcnN0LWdhbGF4aWVzLW1vcmU=)is a productive exercise. - What would this look like if it was fun? Before you quit something on the basis of it being an energy drain on your life, always ask yourself whether there are things that could be changed about the experience to make it energy creating.
I have a list of ~20 questions I ask myself regularly that have unlocked new opportunities and broken damaging patterns of behavior. These questions have truly changed my life. I've been working on collecting them into a useful resource (perhaps a free illustrated e-book) to share alongside a newsletter piece. If you’re interested in seeing the list, reply YES to this email and I’ll put them in a future piece. One Article:"The world desperately needs more optimism to make progress, so I should stop being so shy about it." - Dr. Hannah Ritchie This is a wonderful article about the “optimism stigma” (the idea that society broadly views optimism as blind, dumb, and naive) and how to fight back as an impatient optimist. A few insights worth calling out individually: - The separation of optimism from blind optimism is important: Optimism is about viewing problems as challenges that require solving—not about just assuming that everything will get better in time and without dedicated effort.
- Optimism is not about inaction (the opposite, in fact): Optimism is about creating forward movement to create change and solve big problems.
- Never conflate criticism and pessimism: People who provide constructive criticism are not pessimists. Optimism requires productive criticism in order to flourish and solve big problems.
Always remember my One Podcast:The Diary of a CEO: David Harewood Brilliant and vulnerable episode with a deep discussion on the mental health struggles of award winning actor David Harewood (best known for his roles in Homeland and other hit shows). It’s a wonderful thing that so many successful people—and men in particular—are feeling empowered to share their journeys and personal mental struggles. My hope is that these stories become a reminder that none of us are alone. If you’re struggling—talk to someone. If you’re not—be there for someone who is. Listen to it on Sahil’s Hiring ZoneTalent Collective There have been a lot of layoffs lately. But my talent collective currently has 40+ companies across the tech landscape who are actively hiring. If you’re open to hearing about new opportunities, apply to my Talent Collective and get introduced to over 40 of my favorite companies. You can join publicly or anonymously, and leave anytime. Completely free for candidates. Use the link If you’re hiring, request access to start meeting world class candidates open to new opportunities. I send out a new drop every two weeks. Learn more or request access Refer Friends, Earn Rewards!
If you enjoyed today's newsletter, please share it with your friends and family!
|