---
subject: "Do U.S. Ports Need More Automation?"
from: "Construction Physics <constructionphysics@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-10-08 12:00:25
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Construction Physics", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8588207018748827248", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
On October 1st, 47,000 members of the International Longshoremen's Association (ILA), primarily dockworkers on East and Gulf Coast ports, went on strike after failing to agree contract terms with The strike sparked a discussion about the quality of U.S. ports, and the degree they need to be automated to improve their performance. Most folks have (reasonably) assumed that the union is holding back port automation that would improve productivity. In the 1960s, dockworkers unions vehemently protested against introducing the productivity-enhancing shipping container, and current ILA president Harold Daggett has complained about But despite Daggett and the ILA doing everything in their power to turn people against their cause, the case for port automation isn’t straightforward. It is true that U.S. ports perform poorly compared to ports around the world, but it’s hard to blame this entirely on a lack of automation. Few ports around the world are automated, and the most heavily automated ports (including in the U.S.) don’t necessarily perform the best. Lack of automation may be partly behind poor American port performance, but there are many other factors as well. U.S. container ports perform poorlySince 2020, the World Bank has released a Port Rankings Rank of the five largest U.S. and Chinese Ports on the Container Port Performance Index. Other measures of port performance show the same thing. It takes roughly two to three times as long to move a container in a U.S. port as a Chinese port, and U.S. ports are slower than ports in most other major shipping countries. Container movement times Time in minutes to move a container, by ship size, for top 25 countries by number of port calls. The U.S. does better on bulk cargo and tanker handling, but only manages to be average or somewhat below average in cargo loading/unloading rates and ship waiting times. This situation is not new. Since at least the 2010s, American container ports have been substantially less productive than ports in Southeast Asia. However, it’s not clear how much this can be blamed on automation. The basics of port automationWhen we talk about port automation, we’re really talking about a collection of different tasks, which can be automated to different degrees. We can broadly break container handling automation into three different groups: ship- or quay-side tasks, yard tasks, and land-side tasks. The first are tasks required to move containers from the ship onto the shore, the second are tasks required to move containers around the storage yard, and the third are tasks required to move containers out of the port via land-based transport. When containers are placed on a ship, they’re attached together with Containers are moved on and off ships using large Unloaded containers will typically be moved to a storage yard, using a range of types of vehicles. Some, like regular trucks, move horizontally, while others, like Containers in the storage yard will be moved around either via lifting vehicles or by large gantry cranes. Gantry cranes come in two types: either From the yard, containers are moved out of the port onto land via trucks or rail. Containers must be checked at the port gate, and parts of these gate-checking operations can also be automated using things like radiofrequency ID (RFID) and optical character recognition (OCR) systems to automatically track and update container movements. When a container port is referred to as “automated,” it typically means it has adopted container-moving technologies like automated guided vehicles and straddle carriers, automated gantry cranes, and remotely operated ship-to-shore cranes. Lashing is still mostly done manually even in automated ports, and even “un-automated” ports (including most large ports in the U.S.) have adopted gate automation systems. Port automation and productivityDoes automating container handling improve port productivity? It’s not clear that it does, or that the lack of it is why U.S. ports perform so poorly. For one thing, few ports around the world have adopted this sort of automation. As of 2021 there were around 63 automated or semi-automated container terminals in the world out of more than 1,300 container terminals total, accounting for only about 4% of global container capacity. Where automation has been adopted, it’s often limited to a single container terminal out of Several of these automated terminals are in the U.S. Los Angeles, for instance, has two automated terminals, and its sister port of Long Beach has another. On a country-by-country basis, in fact, the U.S. is towards the higher end in the number of automated or semi-automated container terminals it operates. The ports that have adopted automation aren’t necessarily particularly efficient. Rotterdam was one of the first ports to automate (its first automated terminal opened in 1993), and today it’s one of the most heavily automated ports in the world, but its port performance ranking is just #91, one point above the comparatively less automated New York, and far below the un-automated ports of Charleston and Philadelphia (#53 and #55 respectively). Likewise, the U.S.’s most automated port, Los Angeles, comes in very close to the bottom of the worldwide rankings, while the top two ports on the list (Yangshan in China and Salalah in Oman) have just one and zero automated terminals, respectively. Other analyses likewise point to a complex relationship between automation and efficient port operations. A Why is port automation not a more obvious win? A variety of factors are at work. For one, automated container handling equipment is not always as capable as manual handling. The GAO survey of automated port operators found that while automated equipment had benefits like being able to stack containers closer and sometimes needing fewer container moves, it was sometimes slower and less capable than conventional equipment, even after several years of operation. Automated cranes might make fewer crane moves per hour due to inability to operate in adverse weather conditions, like rain or fog, that a human could handle. When the Port of Auckland tried to adopt automated handling equipment, automated straddle carriers were found to operate at just one third the speed of manual ones, and often behaved unsafely and unpredictably. Auckland ultimately abandoned its automation project after spending $400 million (and losing hundreds of millions more due to shipping delays), and is now Automated equipment is less flexible than a human operator, and it can’t respond to unusual or unexpected situations that a human could handle; AGVs, for instance, often follow fixed paths guided by Relatedly, it’s typically easier to install automated equipment in a new, greenfield container terminal than to retrofit an existing terminal. Union work rules that limit labor flexibility might also make it hard to take maximum advantage of automated equipment. These last two factors are likely part of the reason why Chinese ports tend to see greater advantage from automation than U.S. ports. Container unloading and transport is a long sequence of operations, of which only some can be addressed by automation. If your operations aren’t carefully synced, or they’re bottlenecked by some other factor unrelated to automation (such as the availability of truck chassis), then automation can’t do much to help. Conversely, carefully synchronizing operations to minimize waiting and waste doesn’t require automation to achieve. In 2013, the best-performing container terminal in the world was a non-automated APM terminal in the Japanese port of Yokohama. It achieved this via good old fashioned Automated equipment reduces unit costs of container handling, but this reduction can be offset by the high upfront costs needed to install the equipment. A survey of automated port operators found that payback periods were most often 6 years or more, and some U.S. operators expected payback periods of 10 to 20 years. This makes automation risky if the expected future container volumes don’t materialize, and automation tends to be easiest to justify in very large ports with large container volumes. Large volumes might also be needed for the productivity benefits of automation to materialize. APM Terminals stated in 2021 that its Maasvlakte 2 Terminal was too small to fully achieve the benefits from automation:
Other U.S. port productivity factorsIn addition to the factors of scale, greenfield vs. brownfield sites, and work rules that make it harder for U.S. ports to take maximum advantage of automation (and to generally operate efficiently), there are other factors that drag down American port performance. One factor is the type of work ports are doing. Most U.S. ports are “ Transhipment cargo tends to take less time to move, and ports that have a large fraction of transhipment will naturally have higher performance as measured by vessel waiting time. On the Container Port Performance Index, many of the top-performing ports, like Another major performance factor is hours of operation. Top-performing ports tend to operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, whereas U.S. ports don’t operate around the clock. The limited hours of operation relate to another potential issue, that of lack of coordination. As we noted, effective container handling requires all operations to be coordinated and synchronized, and there’s some evidence that American ports don’t coordinate their operations especially well. In Los Angeles and Long Beach, for instance, individual terminals have separate rail systems for moving cargo, and the systems don’t work together. Lack of coordination between truckers, shipyards, and companies that move containers also seems to be behind the failure of a Another possible issue is infrastructure investment not keeping up with port container volumes, an issue highlighted in a 2015 Federal Maritime Commission Study. One example of this is ConclusionAutomation, at best, seems like a partial explanation of American port productivity problems. The U.S. is not necessarily all that far behind in automated equipment adoption, and it’s not as clear a win as some people seem to think. Plenty of automated ports (including American ones!) don’t operate particularly efficiently, and plenty of non-automated ports do. Of course, this doesn’t mean that the union is correct to ban all automation going forward. Right now, automation is the worst that it will ever be. It will only get better and more capable, and banning it will hamstring port efficiencies in the future even if it doesn’t necessarily do it now. It’s hard to imagine how much poorer the U.S. (and the world) would be if unions had successfully fought off the introduction of the shipping container in the 1960s. We shouldn’t stop the introduction of new, productivity-enhancing technology, but we should also be realistic about what benefits it will actually be expected to yield. If you’re interested in learning more about port automation, a recommended reading list of the best and most useful sources I found is 1 The ITF report claims that transhipment is hard to do with automation, while the GAO report says the opposite, and this METRANS report somehow seems to say both. Construction Physics articles will always remain free, but if you find this work valuable, I encourage you to Construction Physics is produced in partnership with the Institute for Progress, a Washington, DC-based think tank. You can learn more about their work by visiting their You can also contact me on |