---
subject: "going from web2 to web3, how to pitch, trend updates"
from: "web3 newsletter from a16z crypto <a16zcrypto@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2023-08-28 22:46:33
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "a16zcrypto"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_2535365729249697677"]
---
💸 Feature: On financial freedom, web2 to web3, & company building big to smallDavid Marcus, Sonal Chokshi This wide-ranging conversation on our recent episode of the ‘ We also touch on the journey from web2 to web3, and the journey from payments to crypto — including why bitcoin — since our guest is David Marcus, CEO and co-founder of Lightspark (previously head of Novi/Diem/Libra, head of Facebook Messenger, former president of PayPal). From the tension between centralization vs. decentralization and the role of platforms in power, we also talk about the importance of financial freedom and American innovation.
💎 Resource: On ‘protodanksharding’, ‘danksharding’, and ‘data availability sampling’ … in 30(ish) minutesValeria Nikolaenko In just 36 minutes, a16z crypto research partner Valeria Nikolaenko describes and explains protodanksharding, danksharding, data availability sampling, rollups (how they work, types)… all of which are important for future upgrades to Ethereum, and for understanding networking/ blockchain scalability. Nikolaenko also highlights some of the best data availability schemes so that others can improve on them, incorporate those ideas into their own projects, or do further research. For more on why these topics matter — as well as more resources for understanding and applying them — see also this
▶️ How to: On preparing to pitchArianna Simpson Startup fundraising can feel like “as much fun as chewing glass”, observes Simpson in this talk (first delivered at our Crypto Startup School) — it can be that daunting for some. So she covers the process of pitching from start to finish — before making a deck, before the pitch, during the pitch, and following up after — including especially how to craft a narrative for your product and team. Why is this a big market/ vision/ opportunity? Why are you the right team to bring it to market? And what is the one question Simpson likes to ask every founder? (Hint: the answer will be the key theme throughout your pitch). 🌐 Trend: On stateless blockchainsMiranda Christ and Joe Bonneau As blockchains grow to support more users and more frequent transactions, so too grows the amount of information (the “state”) that validators have to store to verify transactions. For example: in Bitcoin, the state consists of a set of unspent transaction outputs; while in Ethereum, the state consists of an account balance for each account, as well as code and storage for each smart contract. These storage burdens will become unwieldy as blockchains grow (given enough accounts or everyday transactions), making it difficult to become a validator — posing a potential threat to decentralization. While it’s tempting to turn to cryptography as a solution — where tools such as Merkle trees and zero-knowledge proofs have previously helped us achieve the implausible — to create “stateless” blockchains, they remain far from practical despite substantial research (e.g., [read the post](https://substack.com/redirect/54717205-f461-4554-a4e1-88b1580e50d7?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)“On the impossibility of stateless blockchains”[watch the video](https://substack.com/redirect/40bda33d-0d88-492d-93c5-a3077450a9a3?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)“On limits on revocable proof systems, with implications for blockchains”[check out the full paper](https://substack.com/redirect/4f2c5e22-7956-49dd-82d1-10028af0e596?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)“Limits on revocable proof systems, with applications to stateless blockchains”share on [Twitter](https://substack.com/redirect/280f7963-86a2-41ce-8dc2-a7edbcd331df?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)|[on Farcaster](https://substack.com/redirect/dd9b71c9-9635-4f61-a7c5-2f6620da6f81?j=eyJ1IjoiOG81NG4ifQ.6oeetudtJEh-zO1onUJvtadWEdbodFIw0h4xbugrh1o)
🗞️ News & moves: IRS guidance on staking; crypto & banks; moreOur ongoing You’re receiving this newsletter because you signed up for it on our websites, at an event, or elsewhere (you can opt out any time using the ‘unsubscribe’ link below). This newsletter is provided for informational purposes only, and should NOT be relied upon as legal, business, investment, or tax advice. Furthermore, the content is not directed at nor intended for use by any investors or prospective investors in any a16z funds. Please see a16z.com/disclosures for additional important details, including link to list of investments. subscribe to our podcast ' |