---
subject: "Kingdoms of Water"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2026-01-25 12:01:20
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
So far, we’ve looked at how rivers like the If your email provider cuts off this post, And perhaps I’m biased, but I think you should be a subscriber if you’re not one already. And if you enjoy these newsletters, you might consider becoming a paid subscriber! You are probably familiar with Angkor Wat. It is a huge and beautiful complex built in the 1100s as a temple to Vishnu and then later turned into a Buddhist temple. It is, by most measures, the largest religious structure on the planet. Looking at pictures of it, like the lovely one below, led me to spend a few minutes googling “Cambodia travel” earlier today. The Angkor Wat complex was built during the heyday of the Khmer Empire, which ruled over most of mainland Southeast Asia between the 800s and the 1400s. It serves, as many religious monuments do, as a symbol of the Khmer people’s devotion to their religion and as an expression of wealth and political power, in this case that of King Suryavarman II. Angkor Wat earned a reputation as one of the great Buddhist centers of the world. The famous Chinese mariner Zheng He visited it in the 1400s, as did Japanese pilgrims and monks. After the Khmer Empire fell and the city of Angkor declined in the 1400s, the complex was partially swallowed by the jungle. Europeans who visited the area in the 19th century portrayed it as a lost site that had been swallowed by the jungle. Henri Mouhot, the Frenchman who claimed to have “discovered” Angkor Wat in the 1860s,
But Mouhot was fudging things a little — Angkor Wat had never been fully abandoned, and local people had known about it all along. Nevertheless, the attention he gave the site helped the wider world understand just how impressive Angkor Wat is; it is now acknowledged to be one of the greatest historical sites in the world. Here’s a photo of it after its “rediscovery” in the 1860s: You may have known all this about Angkor Wat already, but have you ever thought about how much it weighs? It’s made of But Angkor Wat’s weight isn’t just important because of the labor required to construct it. It also matters because these 10 million tons of rock are in You can see the network of canals and barays in blue and green in the satellite image below — Angkor Wat is surrounded by the moat at the center of the image, the West Baray is to its northwest, and canals branch out throughout the region, bringing fertility wherever they go. The scale of the hydraulic engineering in this part of Cambodia is, according to geoscience professor Dan Penny, “ Why did medieval Cambodians engage in such monumental acts of hydraulic engineering? Perhaps because of the natural waterworks that they were able to see in everyday life. See the giant blue lake to the south of Angkor Wat in the image above? That’s Tonlé Sap, and it’s one of the most dynamic bodies of water in the world. In many ways, Tonlé Sap is less a lake than a huge floodplain of the Mekong River. You can see the mechanism in this nifty animated gif: In the wet season, Tonlé Sap grows by up to five times; the movement of fish into the lake is the largest freshwater migration on earth. If you lived in a place with a river as mighty as the Mekong — a flow so great it could reverse the course of other rivers and flood the countryside — you’d probably take a keen interest in water engineering, too. The hydraulic engineering around Angkor Wat is just one of the ways in which the Mekong’s strange rhythms have inspired people in Southeast Asia to invent ambitious ways of working with and against the river. The Khmer people and their successors in Cambodia Angkor Wat may have declined, but Cambodia remained a kingdom of water. After Angkor faded in the 1400s, the capital moved to Longvek, between Tonlé Sap and the Mekong River. You can see the centrality of the Mekong River to Cambodia in this 1686 map: The river’s delta has been the access point and attraction of the area for foreigners since Roman traders visited the port they called In the middle of the 1800s, a more powerful threat emerged to all of the states in the area — French imperialism. After striking a deal with King Norodom in 1863 to make Cambodia a protectorate, the French devised an expedition up the Mekong to expand their reach inland. The goals of the expedition members, pictured below, were a typical mix of colonial ambitions: the Frenchmen wanted to conduct a scientific survey, map the Mekong system, and explore how they might turn Saigon into a trade city as mighty as Shanghai by connecting their possessions to markets in China. The men traveled thousands of miles through the Mekong and its tributaries. They visited Angkor, of course: And Phnom Penh, on the banks of the Mekong: For the first part of their journey, the expedition was optimistic that it had found a river system amenable to colonial exploitation; the Mekong and its tributaries were huge and navigable: But then, upriver, they encountered the Khone Phapheng Falls, which were impassable by any boat. The expedition spent a week there, trying in vain to find a way to get shipping through the falls and rapids, but in the end, the French dream of a water route to China on the Mekong died at the falls (Chinese The men struggled upriver past the falls, through difficult but beautiful terrain. The Frenchmen proved no match for the Mekong. Its commander, Ernest Doudart de Lagrée, suffered from fevers, dysentery, leeches, and a liver abscess before he died two years into the expedition. Eventually, the disease-ridden, exhausted expedition was forced to leave the river behind and return home via China. The information gathered in the expedition was a boon to science and geography, but it was also used for more nefarious purposes. Francis Garnier, one of the group’s leaders, returned to attack Hanoi a few years later. This 1893 cartoon of a French wolf and a Siamese lamb facing off across the Mekong illustrated the significance of the river to French imperial designs: The crisis depicted in the cartoon originated when Siamese authorities tried to stop the French from smuggling their most lucrative colonial export down the Mekong River. That export was opium. The final Mekong story I want to touch on happened during another conflict that many saw as an act of imperialism — the American war in the 1960s and 1970s. The Mekong Delta — with thousands of miles of riverway and almost as many miles of manmade canals — was a major theater of war between the Americans, the South Vietnamese, and the Viet Cong. Here’s a photo of ARVN (South Vietnamese) soldiers patrolling in 1961 to give you a sense of the terrain, or lack thereof: The American “ In the end, the Americans were unable to “pacify” the entire Mekong Delta. But the river has been tamed in other ways. In addition to the huge network of canals, dikes, and reservoirs, there are now over These dams may, finally, allow humans to complete their long quest to control the river, but that might not be a good thing. The Mekong’s strange rhythms have shaped human history for centuries, but people have seen the river’s power and devised their own ambitious hydrological projects. The presence and power of this unusual river continue to shape the history of Southeast Asia, and they will test just how far human ingenuity can go in taming it. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! You're currently a free subscriber to |