---
subject: "MicroStrategy's $37B+ Bitcoin Bet"
from: "Trung Phan <trungphan@workweek.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-11-30 06:01:55
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Trung Phan"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_7971156048460647958"]
---
Whether or not you agree with Saylor’s thesis, there is no denying that Bitcoin has gone from $0 market cap in 2009 to $1.9T in market cap in 2024.
MicroStrategy has been a very visible part of Bitcoin’s rise in recent years. This journey began in August 2020 when Saylor announced that MSTR would be the first publicly-traded US company to make Bitcoin its primary treasury asset. For any shareholders that didn’t want to come along for the ride, MicroStrategy did a buyback at a premium to the stock price.
These two decisions rotated MicroStrategy’s investor base from people holding onto a (slowly) dying software business to people that wanted exposure to Bitcoin. This corporate treasury move soon turned into a raison d’etre for MSTR: Saylor would use MicroStrategy’s existence as a publicly-traded company to issue equity and debt, then use those funds to buy up more Bitcoin.
MicroStrategy was stumbling into a unique business model that solved issues around crypto access:
-
Ease of investment: A lot of investors interested in Bitcoin aren’t savvy enough to buy BTC on a crypto exchange and self-custody the asset. Also, some high-profile crypto-exchanges ended up screwing regular investors (think FTX).
- Regulation: Many pools of capital — pensions, institutional funds, retirement plans — aren’t allowed to invest directly in crypto.
-
Leverage: Savvy crypto investors and Bitcoin Maxis want to borrow money to increase bets on their Bitcoin positions but this type of leverage isn’t widely available. When the leverage was available, the collateral requirements and cost of capital were onerous. Not many individuals can raise billions of dollars of debt to buy Bitcoin.
MicroStrategy proved a versatile asset to address these obstacles and appealed to large sources of capital. It was a US equity that people could buy on any trading platform. It wasn’t regulated as a crypto company. It was able to lever up by issuing long-term debt and buying Bitcoin (with no risk of getting a margin call).
MicroStrategy’s playbook was commerce 101. Offer people a product they can’t get anywhere else. If I want a Spicy Chicken Burger, a baked potato and chocolate Frosty…there is only one place to go and it rhymes with Fendi’s. In 2020, people that wanted a specific type of exposure to Bitcoin had to go to MicroStrategy. Keep this in mind as walk through the rest of the story.
From Saylor’s August 2020 announcement, MSTR responded to the Bitcoin pivot and its stock price rocketed from an adjusted ~$10 ($2B market cap) to as high as ~$100 ($20B) before retracing back to the teens following the FTX bankruptcy in November 2022.
I know our memories are short but 2022 was just a brutal investing year (the memes were incredible, though). Since MicroStrategy was a levered Bitcoin proxy, it fell harder than Bitcoin did during the market sell-off. Crucially, though, MicroStrategy was never forced to liquidate its Bitcoin holdings.
In 2023, MicroStrategy traded between $20 ($4B) and $60 ($12B)…which takes us to a wild 2024.
***
MicroStrategy’s Financial Engineering
In January 2024, major financial players — such as BlackRock, Fidelity and Franklin Templeton — launched 11 Bitcoin ETFs, signalling broader acceptance of the digital asset.
Billions of dollars flowed into these ETFs and MicroStrategy’s value proposition for the normie investor seemingly diminished. However, it has become clear that Saylor and his team were formalizing a new product targeted at different pools of capital.
Remember how I talked about those Saylor podcasts? Well, he is a master of analogies and explained MicroStrategy’s new value prop with a few interesting comparisons.
Before I say what these comparisons are, let me flag an analogy from the time that me and the Not Investment Advice podcast team interviewed Saylor in 2022. He dropped so many gems but my favourite was his explanation as to why [Bitcoin is the apex method to store value](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9CMVBJN0JDam9waz9zaT0zcDJGcEJyd0U5bmlpSEpZJnQ9MjM0MCZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Baead116d):
Me: What would make you think your thesis on Bitcoin was wrong?
Saylor: If I saw something better.
If you invent a fusion reactor that can run a Tesla on a sugar cube for a 100 years and you asked me whether I would buy that instead of the [regular] Tesla — all things being equal — I think I like the car with the fusion motor or the atomic overthruster.
[But] I just haven't seen it. Bitcoin at its core is more of an ideology: let's implement conservation of energy in cyberspace via a protocol, which is fair and equitable. [Bitcoin has] done that.
I repeat: a fusion reactor that can run a Tesla on a sugar cube for 100 years.
Anyway, back to Saylor’s new analogies for MicroStrategy, which he calls the first “Bitcoin Treasury Company” in the world (the acronym is…BTC). This new version of MicroStrategy takes “raw Bitcoin” and “refines it” to offer a financial products that different parts of the market want to buy. He also compared this refinement process to electricity transformers in a [recent conversation with Natalie Brunell](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly95b3V0dS5iZS9wUTdmanBxelVTND9zaT1RLVpSRjd5YkRwRTVaVzVHJnQ9NDY2MiZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B326f7ab9):
[Our most] compelling business opportunity is as a Bitcoin Treasury Company. What we’re offering is securities backed by Bitcoin. The bond holders want low-risk Bitcoin. The equity holders want high performance Bitcoin. Some people want high-voltage Bitcoin. Some people want low-voltage Bitcoin.
The ETFs are offering raw [Bitcoin returns] and MicroStrategy stock was offering you 120 [volatility] and…levered high-voltage Bitcoin. [...]
So, in essence, MicroStrategy is like a big crypto transformer…Scary high voltage Bitcoin comes in the front and then on one side we step it up to be extreme high-voltage. That’s how you outperform Nvidia. You double Bitcoin or 1.5x Bitcoin.
And then we give everybody else low-voltage Bitcoin. Safe Bitcoin. Low-risk Bitcoin. Low-volatility Bitcoin on this side. The irony of it is everybody's getting exactly what they want. [..]
I have a 480-volt three-phase power on [my] dock. It'll power up a 500-ton yacht. You're not going to plug it into your blowdryer right?…I have a massive transformer to step down the power. There's a lot of value in giving people what they can consume and there's someone that makes a living converting that power into batteries and selling you little battery packs, so you can put it into your kid’s toys.
You know what the markup is [on converting power]? It's like a factor of a thousand markup.
Some investors want stocks. Some want government treasuries. Some want trading cards. Some want real estate. Some want corporate bonds. Some people want dick-shaped NFTs. Some people want Picassos.
One product MicroStrategy is offering that people want is Bitcoin-linked convertible bond notes. The main thing to know about this financial instrument is that an investor gets two components (Quant Bros has a [fantastic chat on MicroStrategy’s entire convertible bond strategy](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj04VTFKcUJRODJiNCZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97C19c6f5e4)):
- A bond component: This is the debt portion with a coupon and a principal amount that is paid back at the maturity date (if the note doesn’t convert to equity).
- An equity component: An embedded call option that allows the bondholder to convert the bond into equity at a pre-determined price (which is at a premium to the price of the stock when the convertible bond is issued).
The convertible bond market is worth ~$800B. It’s a fraction of the overall global bond market — which is ~$300T — but a pretty large pool of capital for MicroStrategy to tap.
Saylor dipped his toes into the convertible note pond with two issuances at t[he start of MicroStrategy’s Bitcoin journey](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly9hc3NldHMuY29udGVudHN0YWNrLmlvL3YzL2Fzc2V0cy9ibHRiNTY0NDkwYmM1MjAxZjMxL2JsdGUwYjgyZTdjODlhNGZlYjMvNjcyMzg0MDdlYzY5MDM2NzllODBjZGM1L2Zvcm0tMTAtcV8xMC0zMS0yMDI0LnBkZj9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B3575ea73):
-
December 2020: $650m at 0.75% interest (5-year term)
- February 2021: $1.05B at 0.00% (6-year term)
In 2024, MicroStrategy has gone HAM with this product and offered five convertible notes and they have been oversubscribed, indicating high demand:
- March 2024: $800m at 0.625% (6-year term)
-
March 2024: $604m at 0.875% (7-year term)
- June 2024: $800m at 2.25% (8-year term)
- September 2024: $1.01B at 0.625% (4-year term)
- November 2024: $3B at 0.0% (5-year term)
In total, that’s ~$8B raised by selling convertible bond notes with funds allocated to buying more of that sweet sweet Bitcoin. These notes are due between 2025 and 2032 and may convert to MicroStrategy equity if MSTR hits the target stock prices.
The November 2024 convertible note of $3B has a 0% interest rate because investors are assigning enough value for the upside equity call option.
Remember, MicroStrategy is very volatile because of how the equity component is tied to the change in the price of Bitcoin (which makes up 99% of the value of the company). If the convertible note doesn’t convert to equity, it’s a senior claim on the company’s assets (if MicroStrategy can’t pay back the debt).
Saylor currently has a major cost-of-capital advantage because there are huge swathes of the investment community — fixed income traders, hedge funds, corporate bond arbitrageurs, YOLO maniacs — that want Bitcoin-linked debt and ability to trade Bitcoin-linked equity volatility. And MicroStrategy is really the only major player offering these products (well, there are also two absolutely bonker ETFs that are offering 2x leverage on top of MicroStrategy stock…[very not investment advice](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly9maW5hbmNlLnlhaG9vLmNvbS9uZXdzL2Jvb21pbmctcmlza3ktbWljcm9zdHJhdGVneS1ldGZzLXRlc3RpbmctMTQ0MjIxNDI0Lmh0bWw_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bdc8db0ac)).
MicroStrategy has also been able to raise funds by issuing shares of its stock (which is trading at a premium to the underlying Bitcoin…some may say its overvalued). While such equity issuances — and the conversion of its convertible debt into equity (if MSTR hits the right price) — will dilute the shareholders, many investors are fine with this outcome under the expectation that MicroStrategy will take the proceeds and buy Bitcoin. Presumably, that will increase the price of Bitcoin, which increases MicroStrategy’s holding of Bitcoin, which increases MicroStrategy’s valuation.
Some have noted that this capital raising and dilution strategy has a ponzi dynamic. But it’s completely out in the open. Also, MicroStrategy’s Bitcoin buys have so far been accretive. In laypeople terms: investors are seeing an increase in price per share even as their shares are diluted because the market is affording MSTR at least a 2x premium on its underlying Bitcoin (we will address whether or not this premium will hold in the next section).
Here are some quick bullet points to get us all on the same page:
- MicroStrategy issues equity and convertible debt
-
It buys Bitcoin, which helps push the value of Bitcoin up
- This increases the value of Bitcoin on MicroStrategy’s balance sheet
- MicroStrategy issues more equity and convertible debt to buy more Bitcoin
This playbook is about to get wild.
MicroStrategy recently announced a plan to raise $42B — $21B in debt and $21B in equity — to buy Bitcoin. On its [Q3 2024 earnings call](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZm9vbC5jb20vZWFybmluZ3MvY2FsbC10cmFuc2NyaXB0cy8yMDI0LzEwLzMxL21pY3Jvc3RyYXRlZ3ktbXN0ci1xMy0yMDI0LWVhcm5pbmdzLWNhbGwtdHJhbnNjcmlwLz9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B35ba5118), the company’s current CEO Phong Le (fellow Viet, whaddup?!) said that the total $42B capital raising target was a head nod to The Hitchhiker’s Guide To The Galaxy (the book’s protagonist finds out that the answer to the universe is the number 42). And, of course, “21” refers to “21 million” as in how much Bitcoin will ever be in existence.
I think this financial engineering dynamic partially explains the 2x premium (and MSTR’s year-to-date gain of +465%). Another part of this premium has to do with the long-term prospects of Bitcoin and the meme-y association with Saylor, who has become one of Bitcoin’s greatest spokesperson.
So, what is the long-term play?
***
Saylor’s Long-Term Bet (and Risks)
I’m guessing right now that some of you have been screaming at your phone or laptop screen and asking “Trung, isn’t this entire MicroStrategy plan dependent on the price of Bitcoin continually going up?!!!?!?!?!?!?”
Absolutely.
There’s a running joke that Saylor found an “infinite money glitch” but there are limits to his strategy. However, Bitcoin doesn’t have to go up a ton to quasi-justify MicroStrategy’s plan.
The first thing to consider is that MicroStrategy has issued long-term debt. The shortest term is the 4-year ~$1B convertible note due in 2028. If Bitcoin tanks between now and then, the note wouldn’t convert to equity and MicroStrategy would be on the hook to pay it back (possibly having to liquidate some Bitcoin → which puts selling pressure on Bitcoin → which negatively impacts MicroStrategy’s Bitcoin holding → which hurts the stock price).
However, there has never been a 4-year period in Bitcoin’s history when it was worth less at the end as compared to the beginning of the period. Marty Bent [writes that](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly94LmNvbS9NYXJ0eUJlbnQvc3RhdHVzLzE4NjEyOTA4NTE2Mjk5OTgyMTk_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bd5d89412) “Bitcoin’s lowest 4-year CAGR is 26% and its 50th percentile 4-year CAGR is 91%. If you think this will continue, then this is a pretty safe bet for MicroStrategy and the convertible note holders.”
Another thing to consider is that MicroStrategy will benefit from some technical changes in financial markets:
MicroStrategy’s potential inclusion in the NASDAQ or S&P 500 indices…which will lead to a wave of buying pressure from passive funds that need to match the index components.
A rule-change by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)…as of January 2025, public companies will be able to mark-to-market the value of its Bitcoin whether it goes up or down. Right now, MicroStrategy can only update its financial statements to reflect a Bitcoin decline but not a gain. If Bitcoin continues to run in 2025, MicroStrategy will report some wild earnings numbers based on the mark-to-market value of its Bitcoin investment, which will flow through the income statement. I’ve seen estimated Q1 2025 earnings in the $5-10B range (in the last quarter, MSTR’s software [operating business lost ~$20m on sales of $116m](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubWljcm9zdHJhdGVneS5jb20vcHJlc3MvbWljcm9zdHJhdGVneS1hbm5vdW5jZXMtdGhpcmQtcXVhcnRlci0yMDI0LWZpbmFuY2lhbC1yZXN1bHRzLWFuZC1hbm5vdW5jZXMtNDItYmlsbGlvbi1jYXBpdGFsLXBsYW5fMTAtMzAtMjAyND9oYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Bc8f2a41b)). How will markets deal with these numbers? The traditional price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio seems inadequate (Saylor believes the long-term MSTR holders are most interested in Bitcoin per share as the key performance indicator (KPI) and is focussing on that number, which he’s dubbed “Bitcoin Yield”).
On the macro level, the incoming Trump administration looks very positive for Bitcoin and crypto. During his Presidential campaign, President-elect Trump mentioned the idea of a “[Strategic Bitcoin Reserve](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cubmV3c3dlZWsuY29tL3doYXQtZG9uYWxkLXRydW1wcy1zdHJhdGVnaWMtYml0Y29pbi1yZXNlcnZlLWNvdWxkLWxvb2stbGlrZS0xOTg2MzYwP2hhc2hlZF91c2VyPTBlYmVmMTJjNDI5MTE4NDU2MmRhYzA5OTY1YmNlODA4/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B9ef1646c)” and — in a recent viral keynote for the Cantor Fitzgerald conference — Saylor explained why this is potentially [a multi-trillion dollar opportunity comparable to the country’s largest historical land purchases ](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cueW91dHViZS5jb20vd2F0Y2g_dj00THFwR3JXR05xRSZoYXNoZWRfdXNlcj0wZWJlZjEyYzQyOTExODQ1NjJkYWMwOTk2NWJjZTgwOA/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Dd8c28fde)(see slide below).
Here comes another analogy. Think through America’s most valuable land acquisitions (Louisiana, Manhattan, Alaska). Saylor calls Bitcoin the “Digital Manhattan” and there’s an opportunity to claim it because: 1) the supply of BTC is capped at 21,000,000; 2) the first rich country to announce its Bitcoin position will lead to a massive demand and price surge for the asset.
The appetite for non-dollar reserves has increased sharply. Central banks around the globe have cranked up the pace of Gold-buying for their reserves over the past 3 years. Part of it was in response to inflation and currency debasement. Part of it — especially in China — was in response to America freezing Russia’s US dollar-based Central Bank assets following its invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Since then, the price of Gold has gone up ~44% from $1,800 to $2,600 (Goldman Sachs forecasts Gold to keep rising in 2025 as more emerging markets Central Banks buy the asset over [“concern about the risk of financial sanctions”](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29sZG1hbnNhY2hzLmNvbS9pbnNpZ2h0cy9hcnRpY2xlcy9nb2xkLXByZWRpY3RlZC10by1jbGltYi1oaWdoZXItdGhhbi1leHBlY3RlZC1hcy1yZWNvcmRzLXNoYXR0ZXI_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97B2832d561)).
If Bitcoin can play a similar role as Gold as a store of value reserve asset, it won’t be long until a large economy announces that it “converted X% of its reserves into Bitcoin”. There’s major game theory here that is way above my brain capacity. All I know is that every country that comes after that first country, is at risk of paying a higher price.
Gold’s market cap is worth about 10x more than Bitcoin right now ($17T vs. $1.9T). Broad Central Bank acceptance will close that gap (some napkin math: Bitcoin equalling Gold's market cap would make it ~$1,000,000 a BTC and Saylor's long-term price target — assuming a world in which everyone believes Bitcoin is the apex store of value — is [$13,000,000...per...BTC...in 2045](https://link.workweek.com/click/37673299.41874/aHR0cHM6Ly9maW5hbmNlLnlhaG9vLmNvbS9uZXdzL3doeS1taWNoYWVsLXNheWxvci1zZWVzLWJpdGNvaW4tMTcyNjA4MDEyLmh0bWw_aGFzaGVkX3VzZXI9MGViZWYxMmM0MjkxMTg0NTYyZGFjMDk5NjViY2U4MDg/6520d6df2061f24a7d071f97Becf44081)...and my calculator just broke calculating what MicroStrategy's current holding of 386,700 BTCs would be worth at that price level).