---
subject: "How to Tame a River"
from: "George Dillard <worldhistory@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-12-28 12:02:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "George Dillard", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "Label_8626544264601150563", "INBOX", "UNREAD"]
---
Happy holidays! For the next few weeks, we’re focusing on how humans shape rivers and how rivers shape human history. First up, the Rhine. Your email provider may cut off this post. Click As always, I deeply appreciate subscribers, and paid subscribers have a special place in my heart. Subscribe by clicking the button below: This post is free to all, but there’s a little extra at the end for paid subscribers… so if you are one, make sure you read to the end!
Burke was trying to say that the sublime was fundamentally beyond reason, but that didn’t stop All of these writers were trying to describe what it’s like when you encounter something so beautiful, or terrifying, or huge, that your brain scrambles for a minute. The experience of the sublime was a driving concept of the Romantic movement in art and literature, many of whose practitioners went out into the world in an attempt to come up against the limits of their reason and senses. For many Romantics, the best place to find the sublime was in nature. The natural world, wild and unruly, was the antidote to the cramped, orderly urban environment that Europeans were building in the early days of the Industrial Revolution. It was capable of making you feel things that you couldn’t feel in the city. Few places saw more pilgrims in search of the sublime than the Rhine River, and the Rhine exemplified the paradox at the heart of the search for the sublime. Because as people came to the Rhine in search of wildness and beauty, they tamed that wildness out of it. There’s a place along the Rhine where a massive rock towers over the river; the noise of the current and a waterfall bounces off the rock, creating an echo. Germans call it Lorelei, the murmuring rock. Lorelei sits over a notoriously treacherous part of the river, where rocks and rapids have sunk countless boats. People told folktales about the sounds they heard at the Lorelei. By the early 19th century, the most famous story was a variation on the myths of Echo and the sirens; the murmur was the song of a young woman who, having been abandoned by her lover, was trying to lure sailors to their death. Heinrich Heine wrote a famous
The spot — and the myth associated with it — features in many paintings, like this 1874 work by Theodore Kaufmann: And this one by Albert Pinkham Ryder: But the very qualities that made this spot such an example of the sublime — the rocks, the waterfall, the rapids, the meandering twists and turns, the mystery, the danger — weren’t great for the people who actually used the river for commerce. Though poets might have liked a raging, unpredictable river that claimed boats and flooded farmlands, engineers, merchants, and farmers saw things differently. The engineer Johann Gottfried Tulla, who grew up along the Rhine, did not see a beautiful, meandering river. He
Sounds bad! Luckily, it was the industrial age, and Tulla believed that man did not need to accept nature as it was:
The Rhine would be made more predictable, more obedient, and more rational. Tulla envisioned dredging the riverbed to deepen the channel while cutting off the river’s meandering twists and turns. This would allow the water to move more quickly to the sea, making flooding less likely and draining the swamps where malaria festered. He also wanted to rid the river of the pesky islands and outcroppings of rock that caused navigators to lose their bearings and damaged so many ships. The new river would be tamer and more useful. It might even, in the aftermath of Napoleon’s conquest of German lands, serve as a unifying conduit between previously divided states. You can see how the river cut through many of the German states as it made its way from central Switzerland to the North Sea: Though Tulla died of the malaria he was trying to eradicate in 1828, his project lived on after his death. It would take over 50 years to “correct” the Rhine. Nineteenth-century maps give a sense of the scale and impact of Tulla’s project. Here we see the straightening project cutting off the inefficient oxbows of the “Old Rhine:” And this map shows the project on a larger scale, in Bavaria: The project worked: over the course of the 19th century, people The new Rhine was under human control; it flooded a lot less often and was much easier to navigate. This, ironically, made it easier for people to travel there in pursuit of the sublime. The project of taming the Rhine coincided with the invention of the boats that would come to dominate it. The first steamboat on the Rhine, the Prince of Orange, These steamboats moved grain and coal, but they also moved people. Tourism of the Rhine region exploded in popularity, as it was now possible to enjoy a pleasant cruise down the river to gaze at its scenic bluffs and crumbling castles. The Rhine soon became an important stop on the Grand Tour (which I wrote about a while back): This was the Rhine that captured the imagination of people around Europe. It appeared in paintings like those of the Lorelei above, along with illustrations like these from “Views from the Banks of the Rhine,” published in 1830: This one from “Views of the Rhine,” published in 1840: And this painting by William Callow: Perhaps the most famous images of the Rhine were produced by J.M.W. Turner, the British Romantic painter who captured the Rhine in stately moods: And wild ones: Writers like Victor Hugo wrote travel narratives that doubled as paeans to the river. Hugo, in his 1840
Hugo’s Rhine was “violent, but not furious; wild, but still majestic.” Guidebooks attracted tourists to the river: Soon, the Koln-Dusseldorfer Line’s steamboats were carrying tourists up and down the river in search of an experience that became less likely the more the river came under human control. The travelers steaming past the Lorelei in the middle of the 19th century came in search of a feeling. Their passengers wanted to be awed by the dramatic natural beauty and crumbling ruins of the Rhine they’d read about or seen in books. But, as so often happens, the changes that made it possible for them to visit in such numbers changed the nature of the place they were visiting. By the end of the 19th century, the Rhine was no longer an “impenetrable jungle.” Its unpredictability had been replaced by efficiency and human control. It was more useful for commerce and tourism, and many parts of it were still quite beautiful. But it no longer astonished its visitors with its wild mysteries. This newsletter is free to all, but I count on the kindness of readers to keep it going. If you enjoyed reading this week’s edition, there are two ways to support my work: You can subscribe as a free or paying member: Or you can “buy me a coffee” by sending me a one-time or recurring payment: Thanks for reading! One last thing. I want to keep these newsletters free, but I also want to give paid subscribers a little something extra in appreciation for their support. So I think I’m going to start occasionally adding a little section with interesting images that didn’t make their way into the main post for paid subscribers only. Let me know what you think!... Keep reading with a 7-day free trialSubscribe to Looking Through the Past to keep reading this post and get 7 days of free access to the full post archives. A subscription gets you:
|