---
subject: "AI #73: Openly Evil AI"
from: "\"Zvi Mowshowitz from Don't Worry About the Vase\" <thezvi@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2024-07-18 14:27:27
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Zvi Mowshowitz"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "UNREAD", "Label_3336704411007769646"]
---
What do you call a clause explicitly saying that you waive the right to whistleblower compensation, and that you need to get permission before sharing information with government regulators like the SEC? I have many answers. I also know that OpenAI, having f***ed around, seems poised to find out, because that is the claim made by whistleblowers to the SEC. Given the SEC fines you for merely not making an explicit exception to your NDA for whistleblowers, what will they do once aware of explicit clauses going the other way? (Unless, of course, the complaint is factually wrong, but that seems unlikely.) We also have rather a lot of tech people coming out in support of Trump. I go into the reasons why, which I do think is worth considering. There is a mix of explanations, and at least one very good reason. Then I also got suckered into responding to a few new (well, not really new, but renewed) disingenuous attacks on SB 1047. The entire strategy is to be loud and hyperbolic, especially on Twitter, and either hallucinate or fabricate a different bill with different consequences to attack, or simply misrepresent how the law works, then use that, to create the illusion the bill is unliked or harmful. Few others respond to correct such claims, and I constantly worry that the strategy might actually work. But that does not mean you, my reader who already knows, need to read all that. Also a bunch of fun smaller developments. Karpathy is in the AI education business. Table of ContentsIntroduction. Table of Contents. Language Models Offer Mundane Utility. Fight the insurance company. Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility. Have you tried using it? Clauding Along. Not that many people are switching over. Fun With Image Generation. Amazon Music and K-Pop start to embrace AI. Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse Soon. FoxVox, turn Fox into Vox or Vox into Fox. They Took Our Jobs. Take away one haggling job, create another haggling job. Get Involved. OpenPhil request for proposals. Job openings elsewhere. Introducing. Karpathy goes into AI education. In Other AI News. OpenAI’s Q* is now named Strawberry. Is it happening? Denying the Future. Projects of the future that think AI will never improve again. Quiet Speculations. How to think about stages of AI capabilities. The Quest for Sane Regulations. EU, UK, The Public. The Other Quest Regarding Regulations. Many in tech embrace The Donald. SB 1047 Opposition Watch (1). I’m sorry. You don’t have to read this. SB 1047 Opposition Watch (2). I’m sorry. You don’t have to read this. Open Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This. What to do about it? The Week in Audio. Joe Rogan talked to Sam Altman and I’d missed it. Rhetorical Innovation. Supervillains, oh no. Oh Anthropic. More details available, things not as bad as they look. Openly Evil AI. Other things, in other places, on the other hand, look worse. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is Difficult. Noble attempts. People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone. Scott Adams? Kind of? Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing Everyone. All glory to it. The Lighter Side. A different kind of mental gymnastics.
Language Models Offer Mundane Utility
A lot of this ultimately is not rocket science:
The question is, how are we going to use what we know? The EU’s response is to pretend that we do not know such things, or that we have to find out without using AI. Presumably there are better responses.
I too find that the minds I trust have great negative capability. In this context, the problems with that approach should be obvious.
Who is seeking rent and who is fighting against rent seeking? In the never ending battle between doctor and insurance company, it is not so clear.
Cut your time investment by 50%, improve success rate from 10% to 90%. Holy guessing the teacher’s password, Batman. Also you have to love ‘make it four times longer.’ That is one way to ensure that the AI arms race is fought in earnest. This is an inherently adversarial system we have chosen. The doctor always will want more authorizations for more care, both to help the patient and to help themselves. The insurance company will, beyond some point, want to minimize authorizations. We would not want either side to fully get their way. My prediction is this will be a Zizek situation. My AI writes my coverage request. Your AI accepts or refuses it. Perhaps they go back and forth. Now we can treat the patient (or, if authorization is refused, perhaps not). The new system likely minimizes the error term. Before, which person reviewed the request, and how skilled and patient the doctor was in writing it, were big factors in the outcome, and key details would often get left out or misstated. In the new equilibrium, there will be less edge to be had by being clever, and at a given level of spend better decisions likely will get made, while doctors and insurance company employees waste less time.
Kling there also expresses optimism about
Language Models Don’t Offer Mundane Utility
Some finger weirdness, but that is very much a person.
Meanwhile Clauding AlongAre people switching to Claude en masse over ChatGPT now that Claude is better? From what I can tell, the cognesenti are, but the masses are as usual much slower.
Claude is at the bottom. It simply is not penetrating to the masses. Yes, Claude Sonnet 3.5 is better than GPT-4o for many purposes, but not ten times better for regular people, and they have not been attempting a marketing blitz. For most people, you’re lucky if they have even tried GPT-4. Asking them to look at alternative LLMs right now is asking a lot. That will presumably change soon, when Google and Apple tie their AIs deeper into their phones. Then it is game on. Fun with Image Generation
Deepfaketown and Botpocalypse SoonAs a warning, What would happen if people started using a future version of this for real? What would happen if companies started figuring out your viewpoint, and doing this before serving you content, in a less ham fisted way? This is not super high on my list of worries, but versions of it will certainly be tried.
They Took Our JobsDoes this create more jobs, or take them away? How does that change over time?
Why would you want this negotiation bot? Price discrimination. The answer is usually price discrimination. Do you want to spend your time ‘negotiating’ with an AI? Those who opt-in will likely be more price sensitive. Those who write longer messages and keep pressing will likely be more price sensitive. Any excuse to do price discrimination. How much you save. People love to think they ‘got away with’ or ‘saved’ something. This way, they can get that. Free publicity. People might talk about it, and be curious. Fun gimmick. People might enjoy it, and this could lead to sales. Experimental information. You can use this to help figure out the right price.
The good news is that at least no one can…
I mean, yeah. There is a very easy way to solve this particular problem, you have a variable max_discount and manually stop any deal below that no matter what the LLM outputs. The key is to only deploy such systems in places where a check like that is sufficient, and to always always use one, whether or not you think it is necessary.
While the user is negotiating ‘as a human’ this net creates jobs. Not formal jobs per se, but you ‘work’ by negotiating with the bot, rather than someone ‘working’ by negotiating with you the customer. Once the user starts telling their own AI to negotiate for them, then what? This is a microcosm of the larger picture. For a while, there is always more. Then eventually there is nothing left for us to do.
(That’s actually how, you start your question with ‘in the past.’) Get InvolvedOpen Philanthropy’s AI governance team
Introducing
My response would be that this is a bet that if you improve quality enough then that changes. Or as others point out you can succeed merely by actually educating people, not everything is about money.
In Other AI NewsSomething must eventually give:
So, is it happening?
That’s one opinion. Here is another.
I worry this will not be the last safety test where many want to use the model that scores the lowest.
Denying the Future
We see this over and over again. When people try to model ‘the impact of AI’ the majority of them, including most economists, refuse to consider ANY improvements in AI in the future. This includes: Any improvement to the base models. Any improvement in scaffolding, integration or prompting. Any improvement in figuring out what to do with AI. Any improvements on cost or speed.
Then, when something new comes along, they admit that particular thing is real, then go back to assuming nothing else will ever change. When the price drops and speed improves, they do not think that this might soon happen again, and perhaps even happen again after that. This is not ‘find ways to ignore the existential risks.’ This is usually also finding ways to ignore what is already baked in and has already happened. Often estimates of impact are below even ‘most people eventually figures out how to do the things some of us already are doing’ let alone ‘we streamline the current process via improved hardware and distillation and such and give people time to build some apps.’
Quiet Speculations
This is a bizarre way to think about stages. If we had ‘human-level problem solving’ reasoners, then we would plug that into existing agent architectures, and after at most a small amount of iteration, we would have effective agents. If we had effective agents and ‘human level-problem solving’ then we would, with again a small amount of iteration, have them be able to function as innovators or run organizations. And from there the sky (or speed of light) would be the limit. What is the missing element that would hold these AIs back? This reeks of McKinsey and a focus on business and marketing, and shows a remarkable lack of… situational awareness.
Given those assumptions, sure, fair enough. However, if those involved are capable of superior coordination and alignment of incentives and utility functions, or of more freely sharing information, or other similar things that should happen with sufficiently capable intelligences, and there are limited unknowns remaining (such as questions about the nature of physics) then AI should be able, at the limit, to do this. The reasons we cannot currently do this involve our lack of ability to coordinate, and to properly integrate local information, our lack of sufficient bandwidth, and the incentives that go wrong when we try. Yes, we have had a lot of rounds of ‘but now with our new techniques and technologies and ideas, now we can centrally plan everything out’ and [it might work for us meme] hilarity reliably ensues. But if AI continues to advance, a lot of the reasons for that are indeed going to become weaker or stop holding over time.
When you have a product where things go wrong all the time, it is nice to be fine with things going wrong all the time. Google found out what happens when they try to move fast despite some minor issues. The flip side is that having a superior model is, for most business cases, not that important on the margin. Character.ai shows us how much people get obsessed talking to rather stupid models. Apple Intelligence and Google’s I/O day both talk about what modalities are supported and what data can be used, and talk little about how intelligent is the underlying model. Most things people want from AI right now are relatively dumb. And reliability matters. Your startup simply cares more about things other than profits and reliable performance. There are some advanced cases, like Sully’s with agents, where having the cutting edge model powering you can be a game changer. But also I kind of want any agents I trust for many purposes to undergo robust testing first?
I don’t see it that way, nor do Microsoft and Google (or OpenAI or Anthropic) shareholders. For OpenAI and Anthropic, yes they are focused on the model, because they understand that pushing quickly to revenue by focusing on products now is not The Way for them, given they lack the connections of the big tech companies. If you ensure your models are smart, suddenly you can do anything you want. Artifacts for Claude likely were created remarkably quickly. We are starting to get various integrations and features now because now is when they are ready. I also don’t think Microsoft and Google made a mistake pushing ahead. They are learning faster, trying things, gathering data, and providing lots of utility. Apple has shipped nothing. Yes, Apple Intelligence looked good on a demo, but everything they demoed was obvious and easy, and won’t be available for a while, I’ve seen challenges to their privacy scheme, and we do not know their underlying models are good. The Quest for Sane Regulations
The replies here are full of how awful this is and how it will crush growth, despite us not knowing what will be in the bill. As I keep saying, such folks do not care what is in the bill.
If that is restricted as is suggested to ‘the most powerful’ AI models, then we will need to see the details on data sharing, but that seems very light touch so far. (The rest of the Labour agenda seems, incidentally, to be highly inconsequential?) Previous polls about AI mostly came from AIPI, a potentially biased source.
I worry that the 18% is more about the technology than the AI, which is how this is at the level of inequality (although inequality never scores highly on surveys of what people actually care about, that’s another case of vocal people being loud). The Other Quest Regarding RegulationsYou know who is not going to let public opposition or any dangers stop them? According to his public statements, So yes, this plan now goes well
The counterargument is that Trump has been known to change his mind, and to say things in public he does not mean or does not follow through with. And also it is not obvious that this plan was not,
Could go either way. I hold out hope that Young is right. It would be very like Trump to be telling this highly focused and wealthy interest group what they want to hear, getting their vocal support and funding, and then it proving to mostly be talk. Or to be his vague intention now, but nothing he cares about or attempts to influence. Also likely is that as the situation changes, and as AI becomes more prominent and more something the public cares about, for Trump to adapt to the changing winds, or for him too to react to actual events. Trump is very good at noticing such things. Trump also has a way of polarizing things. So this could go quite badly as well. If he does polarize politics and go in as the pro-AI party, I predict a very rough 2028 for Republicans, one way or the other.
To the great surprise of no one paying attention, It is not only them. Elon Musk has also unsurprisingly endorsed Trump. Far more tech people than in past cycles are embracing Trump. Indeed, I did a (hugely biased) poll, and the results show a big shift. That’s 33% of the greater ‘tech startup’ group backing Trump, versus only 18% of my other followers. Clearly something has changed quite a lot. Why?
They describe the dynamic Zeitlin mentions about The complaints about criticism of philanthropy I don’t doubt is genuine, and the thing they are mad at is real and also super dumb. Yet it is pretty rich given how much they and those they fund and support work to portray others as villains for charitable giving or being funded by charitable giving. They’re trying to have that both ways, charitable giving for me but not for thee, not if I disagree with your cause. I think Andreesen and Horowitz lead with the vibes stuff partly because it is highly aversive to have such vibes coming at you, and also because they are fundamentally vibes people, who see tech and Silicon Valley as ultimately a vibes driven business first and a technology based business second. Their businesses especially are based on pushing the vibes. This explains a lot of their other perspectives and strategies as well, including their actions regarding SB 1047, where the actual contents of the bill are fine but the vibes have been declared to be off via being loud on Twitter, so they hallucinate or fabricate different bill content. When it comes to AI what do they want? To not be subject regulations or taxes or safety requirements. To instead get handouts, carveouts and regulatory arbitrage. Trump offers them this. Even more than AI, for them, there is crypto. They lead (24 minutes in) with crypto and talk about how important and amazing and remarkable they claim it is, especially for ‘creatives’ and ‘who controls the truth,’ versus how awful are Google and Apple and Meta. Trump is strongly pro-crypto, whereas Biden is anti-crypto, and a huge portion of a16z’s portfolio and business model is crypto. And they see Biden’s and the SEC’s anti-crypto moves as against the rule of law, because they think the law should permit crypto and should tell them exactly what they must do to be in compliance with the laws in order to do their regulatory arbitrages, whereas the SEC under Biden is of the legal opinion that crypto mostly is not legal and that they are not under any obligation to spell out exactly what the rules are any more than they do so in other cases. For further thoughts on crypto regulation in practice,
I am not so cynical that I buy that this type of thinking is an important factor. Yes, a lot of people are voting their financial interests, but mostly not like that.
Horowitz makes it clear They talk throughout (and at other times) as if (essentially) tech startups are all that matters. I wonder to what extent they believe that. So Andreessen and Horowitz are for many overdetermined reasons supporting Trump. This is not complicated. In terms of their AI discussions I will say this: It is in no way new, but the part where they talk about the Executive Order is called ‘Discussion on Executive Order limiting math operations in AI’ which tells you how deeply they are in bad faith on the AI issue. There are no limits in the executive order on anything whatsoever, other then requiring you to announce your actions. Meanwhile they continue to brand frontier AI models as ‘math’ as if that is a meaningful in-context description of training a model with 10^26 FLOPS of compute, or as if both every computer and also the entire universe are not also math in equally meaningful senses.
On this point, they are correct. I am pretty furious about it too. (They somehow manage to go too far and then way too far in their discussion anyway, they cannot help themselves, but ignore that, the reality is quite bad enough.) Even if you don’t take the proposal literally or seriously as a potential actual law, it is highly illustrative of where Biden’s policy thinking is at, no matter who is actually doing that policy thinking. Other moves along that line of thinking could be quite bad. If you do take it seriously as a real proposal, I cannot overstate how bad it would be.
Here is Jon Stokes taking it seriously.
If you see someone running for President proposing a policy that would wipe out your entire industry and also cripple the whole economy (not purely because it would kill venture based tech and startups, although that alone would indeed be terrible, but because it would hit a lot of other places too) - and I want to be 100% clear that this is not anyone imagining things or engaging in hyperbole this time, that is what would happen if this policy where implemented - then yes it is an entirely reasonable reaction to consider that person your enemy. Also, at [2:30] in their podcast, Ben Horowitz notes that they tried to meet with Biden and he refused, whereas at [1:19:30] or so they reveal Ben hangs out with Trump’s kids and Trump will clearly at least hear them out. I assume I know why Biden refused, and I assume they assume the same answer, but this stuff matters a lot, and the Democrats should be thinking about how that kind of thing plays out. Those in tech also have many highly legitimate gripes with the terrible government and policies of the city of San Francisco. Those do not much logically relate to the national picture, but it feels as if they should, so there is impact. How far does this go for the rest of Silicon Valley? Clearly much farther than in the last two cycles. I think this is mostly confined to the same Very Online circles that are loud on Twitter, but I’m not well positioned to tell, also note Rohit’s second statement.
There is another highly understandable reason for all these sudden endorsements.
Indeed. Now that the zeitgeist (what we used to call the vibes) say that Trump is going to win, everyone has more upside, less downside and more social permission to make it official and endorse The Donald, and try to get out in front. Also recent events have provided ample additional justifications for that choice. I do think there has been a vibe shift, but in addition to having a reasonably different list of things I would cite (with overlap of course) I would say that those vibes mostly had already shifted. What happened in the last few week is that everyone got the social permission to recognize that. If it had been a real vibe shift in preferences, the polls would have moved a lot recently. They didn’t. SB 1047 Opposition Watch (1)This section is included for completeness. You can (and probably should) skip it. There are not actual new objections, but it is important (within reason, if they are sufficiently prominent) to not silently filter out those who disagree with you, even when you believe they do not bring new or good arguments. First off we have Then we have, because it was linked at MR, which I believe justifies one more complete response: I have never met a regulatory proposal or regime that Reason would not describe as authoritarian.
In the context of SB 1047, I’d put it this way: The RAAIA bill is what it would look like if you took everything people hallucinate is in SB 1047 but is not in SB 1047, and attempted to implement all of it in thoughtful fashion, because you believe it is justified by the catastrophic and existential risks from AI. RAAIA absolutely is a prior restraint bill, and a ‘get all the permits in advance’ bill, and ‘the regulators decide what is acceptable’ bill. This is not some extraordinary approach to regulation. It is a rather standard thing our government often does. I believe it does too much of it too often, in ways that have more costs than benefits. I think zoning is mostly bad, and NEPA is mostly bad, and occupational licensing is mostly bad, and so on. I would do dramatically less of those. But are they authoritarian or extreme? If so then our entire government is such. It is very good to lay out what such a regime and its details would look like for AI. The RAAIA proposal includes highly thoughtful details that would make sense if the risks justified such intervention, and offer a basis on which to iterate and improve. The alternative to having good available details, if suddenly there is a decision to Do Something, is to implement much worse details, that will cost more and accomplish less. Government indeed often does exactly that on very large scales, exactly because no one thought about implementation in advance. If we do ever move forward with such a framework, it will be vital that we get the details right. Most important is that we set the proper ‘prices,’ meaning thresholds for various levels of risk. I often warn against setting those thresholds too low, especially below GPT-4 levels. There are some unusual provisions in RAAIA in particular that are cited as evidence of ‘anti-democratic’ or authoritarian or dictatorial intent. Then he transitions to SB 1047. Remember that thing where I point out that reactions to SB 1047 seem to not have anything to do with the contents of SB 1047? Yep.
‘The language is milder’ but ‘a similar authoritarian effect’? You don’t care what the bill says at all, do you? This gives the game entirely away. This is the perspective that opposes drivers licenses, that views all regulations as equally authoritarian and illegitimate. The post then goes on to repeatedly mischaracterize and hallucinate about SB 1047, making claims that are flat out false, and calling the use of ordinary legal language such as ‘reasonable,’ ‘good faith’ or ‘material,’ out as ‘weasel words.’ This includes the hallucination that ‘doomers’ will somehow have control over decisions made, and the repeated claims that SB 1047 requires ‘proof’ that things will ‘never’ go catastrophically wrong, rather than what it actually asks for, which is reasonable assurance against such outcomes. Which is a common legal term that is absolutely used in places where things go wrong every so often. Reason Magazine has now done this several times, so in the future if it happens again I will simply say ‘Reason Magazine says Reason Magazine things’ and link back here. It saddens me that we cannot have watchdogs that can better differentiate and be more precise and accurate in their analysis. Similarly, if Marginal Revolution offers another such link of similar quality on this topic, I will not longer feel the need to respond beyond a one sentence summary.
Some people who are worried put quite a lot of work and optimization pressure into creating well-crafted, minimally invasive and minimally disruptive policies, such as SB 1047, and to respond to detailed criticism to improve them. Others, like the authors of RAAIA, still do their best to be minimally disruptive and minimally invasive, but are willing to be far more disruptive and invasive. They focus on asking what would get the job done, given they think the job is exceedingly demanding and difficult. The response we see from the vocal unworried is consistently almost identical. My model is that: Many such folks are hardcore libertarians, at least on technology issues, so they are loathe to suggest anything, especially things that would improve such bills, and instead oppose all action on principle. When vocal unworried people believe the motivation behind a rule was ultimately concern over existential risk, they seem to often lose their minds. This drives them into a frenzy. This frenzy is based on hating the motivation, and has nothing to do with the proposal details. So they don’t propose better details. There is a deliberate strategy to delegitimize such concerns and proposals, and to give a false impression of what they would do, via being as loud and vocal and hysterical as possible, with as extreme claims as possible, including deliberate misrepresentation of bill contents or what they would mean. Those doing this care entirely about impressions and vibes, and not other things. A lot of this is a purely selfish business strategy by a16z and their allies.
They do correctly point out that Newsom might veto the bill. I do not understand why they would not simply override that veto, since the bill is passing on overwhelming margins, but I have been told that if he does veto then an override is unlikely. I presume the full ‘explainer’ is nothing of the sort, rather advocacy of the type offered by others determined to hallucinate or fabricate and then criticize a different bill. SB 1047 Opposition Watch (2)You can skip this one as well.
No, because Cyget-8B is not a covered model. Llama-8B was not trained using $100 million or 10^26 FLOPS in compute, nor was Cyget-8B, and it is not close. (Also of course this is irrelevant here because if it were covered then I would be happy to give reasonable assurance right here right now under penalty of perjury that Cygnet-8B fully jailbroken remains not catastrophically dangerous as per SB 1047.) Even if this was instead the future Cyget-1T based off Llama-1T? Nope, still not Gray Swan’s responsibility, because it would be a derivative of Llama-1T. But let’s suppose either they used enough additional compute to be covered, or they trained it from scratch, so that it is covered. What about then? Would this be ‘reasonably foreseeable’? Yes. That is the definition of ‘foreseeable,’ reasonably or otherwise. It was not only Pliny. If it always happens two days later, then you can and should reasonably foresee it. If you know damn well that your model will get jailbroken within two days, then to release your model is to also release the jailbroken version of that model. Thus, what you need to reasonably assure will not cause a catastrophe. Because that is exactly what you are putting out into the world, and what we are worried will cause a catastrophe. What are you suggesting? That you should be allowed to whine and say ‘noooo fair, you jailbroke my model, I specifically said no jailbreaking, that doesn’t count?’ You think that this is some gotcha or unreasonable burden? That is Obvious Nonsense. Let us go over how the physical world works here, once more with feeling. If you release an Open Weights model, you release every easily doable fine tune. If you release a Closed Weights or Open Weights model, you release the version that exists after the jailbreak that will inevitably happen. That is true, at the bare minimum, until such time as you find a way to prevent jailbreaks you think works, then you hire Priny the Prompter to try to jailbreak your model for a week, and they report back that they failed. If it would not be safe to release those things then don’t f***ing release you model. Consider the mattress sale example. If your mattress price negotiator will sell Pliny a mattress for $0.01, then you have a few choices. Find a way to stop that from happening. Don’t honor the ‘sale,’ or otherwise ‘defend against’ the result sufficiently. Show that those who know how to do this won’t do enough damage at scale. Not use the negotiation bot.
Your CEO is (hopefully) going to insist on #4 if you cannot make a good case for one of the other proposals. What is so hard about this? Why would you think any of this would be OK? Open Weights are Unsafe and Nothing Can Fix This
His prediction is that the outcome will depend on which view wins in the National Security community. Which way will they go? Almost all reactions are on the table. If I was NatSec I would not want to hand frontier models directly to our enemies, even if I did not take the other threats seriously, but they do not think like I do. The Week in Audio
Here is San Francisco Fed head Mary Daly saying AI must be augmenting rather than replacing workers, explaining that It is insane to hear the interviewer talk about productivity gain estimates (at 6:15) as a range from 1% to 7%. No, I know of some rather higher estimates. I discuss the a16z podcast in The Other Quest Regarding Regulations. How did I miss this one until right now (when YouTube suggested it!) and no one told me, One thing I noticed early is Joe mentioning [9:30] that he suggested having an AI government ‘without bias’ and ‘fully rational’ making the decisions. The push to give up control will come early. Joe admits he is not ‘comfortable’ with this, but he’s not comfortable with current decisions either, that are largely based on money and central interests and super corrupt and broken. So, **** it? Rhetorical InnovationMaybe it’s you, indeed: Oh Anthropic
There are key ways in which Anthropic behaved differently than OpenAI. Anthropic offered consideration, whereas OpenAI made demands and threats. Anthropic paid for an independent lawyer to advocate on Nanda’s behalf, whereas OpenAI actively tried to prevent departing employees from retaining a lawyer. Anthropic made explicit exceptions for reporting regulatory issues and law enforcement, whereas OpenAI… well, see the next section.
Here are the exact clauses:
Openly Evil AIYou know that OpenAI situation with the NDAs and nondisparagement agreements?
We have a copy of
If the whistleblowers are telling the truth? We are not in a gray legal area. This is no longer a question of ‘the SEC goes around fining firms whose confidentiality clauses fail to explicitly exempt statements to the SEC,’ which is totally a thing the SEC does, Matt Levine describes the trade as getting your employment contract, circling the confidentiality clause in red with the annotation “$” and sending it in as a whistleblower complaint. And yes, you get fined for that, but it’s more than a little ticky-tacky. This is different. This is explicitly saying no to whistleblowing. That is not legal. Also, what the actual ****? It is one thing to not want additional whistleblower protections. But to put in a written legal document, that if a whistleblower does get compensation because OpenAI is fined, that they have to give up that compensation? To require written permission from OpenAI before being allowed to share information on OpenAI’s violations with federal authorities? I mean, who has the sheer audacity to actually write that down? From the complaint:
They call upon forcing OpenAI to produce all its employment agreements, severance agreements, investor agreements and any other contract with an NDA, and that they notify all current and past employees that they actually do have the right to whistleblow. To ask OpenAI to cure the ‘Chilling effect.’ Plus fines, of course. So many fines. Then there was So here is the Washington Post again.
They tested GPT-4 for months to ensure it was not dangerous. They tested GPT-4o for… a week.
Part of this was a streamlined process.
It is good to have all your ducks in a row in advance and yes this should speed things up somewhat. But where are the rest of the ducks?
If you are claiming that you can test a new frontier model’s safety sufficiently in one week? I do not believe you. Period. In a week, you can do superficial checks, and you can do automated checks. That is it. It is becoming increasingly difficult to be confused about the nature of OpenAI. Aligning a Smarter Than Human Intelligence is DifficultThe standard plans for how to align or train advanced AI models all involve various sorts of iteration. Humans in the loop are expensive, and eventually they won’t be able to follow what is going on, so instead rely on GPT-N to evaluate and train GPT-N or GPT-(N+1). I have repeatedly said that I do not expect this to work, and for it to break down spectacularly and catastrophically when most needed. If you iterate on finding the best optimization for exactly the problem described, you are going to describe increasingly different problems from the one you care about solving. If you subject yourself to an iterated case of Goodhart’s Law you are going to deserve exactly what you get.
The good news is that this was mainly done on GPT-3.5 (IN MICE) and when they tested on GPT-4 they got smaller distortions. The optimistic
That’s how OpenAI describes it. Here’s Jan Leike, who is an author, focusing on a the misalignment aspect.
At core it seems this is how they stopped being fooled by the ‘sneaky’ AI: Sneaky AI fools you. Collect example of being fooled. The output that fooled you gets added to your training data. You learn to avoid that. Profit. Repeat until the sneaky AI’s sneaky ideas all no longer work.
The problem is that Or as OpenAI puts it, ‘this requires ground truth labels.’ Yes, you can use this technique to teach the AI to differentiate between good outputs and bad outputs… if and only if you already have the ability to know and label which outputs are good and which ones are bad. So I don’t see how you can use this to move up the chain. If you have a new smarter AI, you can reward it based on whether a dumber AI, or a dumber human, is confident the answers are correct. And yes, this will teach the smarter AI to make its answers legible, but it will also teach it to present them in convincing ways, whatever those might be, including deceptive or ‘sneaky’ ones. You are teaching it to fool you. This seems actively doomed in the cases where you need it most. No, this won’t teach the advanced AI to describe things in ways that are unlikely to fool you. Quite the opposite. It will learn not to try and fool you in cases where you would detect it, and learn to fool you when it can do so successfully. How do you think that ends?
The question is not whether alignment work can be undone. It you have open model weights it can and will all quickly be undone. The question is if the weights are closed and you can only do permitted fine tuning, what it takes in practice to pull this off. Here, we see that modification to extract training data is essentially free.
People Are Worried About AI Killing Everyone
Other People Are Not As Worried About AI Killing EveryoneWhy build something that might kill everyone? Why do anything big?
This is definitely not an ‘ Roon and I, and I am guessing most of you reading this, can appreciate the glory. We can understand the value of greatness, and indeed the value of the act of striving for greatness. Very much so. I worry and expect that most people no longer appreciate that, or appreciate it vastly less. Certainly this is no longer an ‘ The catch, of course, is that there is no glory, even for Achilles, if there is no one around to remember you and your deeds. That does at least some work, but as long as there’s a way to tell yourself things might work out, it is not enough to cause reasonable decisions. If you think Sam Altman wants glory the way Achilles or Julius Caesar wanted glory? Sic transit, gloria mundi. The Lighter Side
You're currently a free subscriber to |