---
subject: "Is quantum mechanics really bewildering and mysterious?"
from: "Samir Varma from Samir Varma <samirvarma@substack.com>"
to: ""
date: 2025-03-31 14:03:47
labels: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Samir Varma", "UNREAD"]
label_ids: ["CATEGORY_PERSONAL", "INBOX", "Label_2890205615693839461", "UNREAD"]
---
|
It's really not all that complicated. In classical mechanics, we write down a mathematical formula called a Lagrangian. This formula encodes, roughly speaking, all the forces that the particle will feel as it traverses some part of spacetime. We then calculate a thing called the “action”, which is a function of the Lagrangian. We then minimize that “action” (roughly speaking, we are minimizing a measure of energy expenditure). The path that minimizes the action is the path that the particle follows.
Richard Feynman proposed a conceptually simple extension of this idea to quantum mechanics. A particle doesn't follow one path through spacetime. It follows all possible paths through spacetime. Note the phrase “all possible”. If a path is impossible it is not followed. For all intents and purposes, the main difference between quantum mechanics and classical mechanics can be traced to just this difference. Really! That's it!
You will, no doubt, have heard of the ubiquitous “double slit” experiment. Imagine you have a screen with two narrow openings (slits) and a screen behind it. You shine light or send small particles (like electrons) through the slits after which they hit the screen. If you only open one slit, you see a single band on the screen, as though you shot tiny bullets through a hole. But if both slits are open and no one is measuring which slit each particle goes through, a series of light and dark bands appear, known as an interference pattern. It’s as if each particle travels through both slits simultaneously and interferes with itself like a wave. However, the moment you measure which slit a particle actually uses, the interference pattern vanishes. This highlights a fundamental idea in quantum mechanics: observation changes the behavior of the system. And this confuses everyone that thinks about it. Why should the act of observing which slit a “particle” went through eliminate the interference pattern? All kinds of what I like to call “woo woo” explanations follow from this. People have written entire books about quantum consciousness, spirituality, and who knows what else, all following from this one experimental fact.
But there is nothing mysterious here at all! If you do not observe the particle at either slit, then the paths that the particle could have followed include both slits. If, on the other hand, you do observe the particle at one slit or the other, then, by simple logic, the particle could not have followed any path that went through the slit that was not observed! So in the case of observing at one slit, you cannot get interference because there is no other slit that is in the path that the particle could have followed!
That is literally all there is to this. There is nothing complicated about it. Is it profound? Yes. Are the concomitant consequences counter-intuitive? Very. But is it related to some great cosmic spiritual quest? Bah, humbug.
The real confusion arises from our insistence that the universe be intuitive to minds evolved to handle day-to-day tasks in our macroscopic world. Question: what does evolving a brain that can catch fish or grow corn have to do with physics on the microscope scale? Answer: nothing!
On scales dramatically smaller (or sometimes larger) than our familiar vantage point, why should we anticipate that phenomena will always align with everyday experience?
That's the heart of quantum mechanics’ “mystery”: it refuses to neatly align with the classical constructs and intuitions we love. Far from being some spooky anomaly, these path integrals and wave-like phenomena are perfectly mathematically consistent, and have been validated time and again by a century’s worth of experiments. Indeed, if quantum mechanics were as intuitive as a flying baseball, that would be the bigger surprise.
So now can we all please drop the “woo woo” crap?
Check out my new book, https://www.amazon.com/Science-Free-Will-Determinism-Everything/dp/1803417315?crid=4RLH9J0JISS9&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.g9TwNNPn17kuRd-QxB5Yvg.raadypALJodwlMUK1OdXP-q8WMG0swZUJ41D5OESIEM&dib_tag=se&&&sprefix=isbn+9781803417318,aps,68&sr=8-1&&&&language=en_US&ref_=as_li_ss_tl for more cool stuff!
Samir Varma is free today. But if you enjoyed this post, you can tell Samir Varma that their writing is valuable by pledging a future subscription. You won't be charged unless they enable payments.